Part of my purpose in presenting this work is to assist people to be aware of certain events that have happened on this planet or are presently happening or are about to happen, events that are radically affecting our consciousness and the way we’re living today. By understanding our present situation, we can open to the possibility of a new consciousness, a new humanity emerging on Earth. In addition, perhaps, my dearest purpose is to inspire you to remember who you really are and give you the courage to bring your gift to this world. For God has given each one of us a unique talent which, when truly lived, changes the physical world into a world of pure light. I’ll also be giving mathematical and scientific evidence to show how we got here, as spiritual beings in a physical world, in order to convince the left-brain analytical part of us that there is only one consciousness and one God, and that we are all part of that Oneness. This is important, for it brings both sides of the brain into balance. This balance opens the pineal gland and allows the prana, the life-force energy, to enter the innermost part of our physical being. Then and only then is the body of light called the Mer-Ka-Ba possible. However, please understand that the evidence I originally learned this information from is in itself not important. The information could in most cases be completely changed to different information without affecting the outcome. In addition, I made many mistakes because I am now human. What is most interesting to me is that every time I made a mistake, it led into a deeper understanding of the Reality and a higher truth. So I say to you, if you find an error, look deeper.
I’ll also be giving my personal experiences, many of which are, I admit, outrageous by the ordinary world’s standards. Perhaps they are not so outrageous by the old world’s standards, but it is you who must decide if they are true or are just stories — or if it even matters. Listen deeply with your heart, for your heart always knows the truth. Then I intend to share with you, as much as I can in the second volume, a specific breathing technique that will help you return to the vastly higher state of consciousness from which we all came. It is the remembrance of the breath connected to the lightbody of the Mer-Ka-Ba. This is one of the primary purposes of this work. At this point a short story of how this book came about is in order. You will read about the angels, so I will not begin there, but rather with the later events. In 1985 the angels asked me to begin teaching the meditation of the Mer-Ka-Ba. I first learne d it in 1971 and had been practicing it ever since, but I did not want to become a teacher. My life was easy and fulfilled. Basically, I was comfortable and didn’t want to work so hard. The angels said that when someone is given spiritual knowledge, they must share it. They said it was a law of creation. Knowing they were right, I opened my first class to the public in the spring of 1985. By 1991 my workshops were filled and overflowing, with hundreds of people on the waiting list. I didn’t know how to reach everyone who wanted this information. In fact, I could not. So in 1992 I made a decision to release a video of one of my workshops and let it go out to the world. Within less than a year it was exploding in sales, but there was one big problem. Most of the people who were watching the videos could not really understand what was presented because it was outside the context and content of their spiritual understanding. I gave a lecture to ninety people in Washington State, all of whom had seen the video tapes but had never been to one of my live workshops. It was there that I realized that only about 15 percent of the people actually knew how to live the meditation by using only the instructions on the video tapes. It was not working. Eighty-five percent were confused and unclear about the instructions. Immediately I took the video tapes off the market. This, however, did not stop the video from continuing to be sold. People wanted the information, so they began to copy the existing tapes and give, sell or lease them to people worldwide. By 1993, it has been estimated that there were approximately 100,000 sets of these tapes in the world. A decision was made. It was determined that the only way we could be responsible with this information was to have a trained person in the room when someone watched the video tapes. Trained means that we had carefully instructed a person to know and live the Mer-Ka-Ba. That person could then orally teach another. This is how the Flower of Life facilitator program was born. There are now over 200 trained facilitators in at least 33 countries. And the system has worked very well. Now things are changing again. People are beginning to understand higher consciousness and its value and concepts. It is now time to release this book to the general public, which is now ready, we feel. A book has the advantage that people can take more time to study the drawings and photos carefully at leisure. And it will also have current updated information such as follows.
Ever since the angels first appeared in 1971,1 have been following their guidance. This is still true today. It was the angels who gave me the meditation of the Mer-Ka-Ba, and it is the meditation that is important here, not the information that is presented. The information is used just to bring us to a point of clarity so we can enter into a particular state of consciousness. Understand that as I received the scientific information in the early years from 1971 to about 1985, I thought it was for my own personal growth. When I would read a scientific paper or magazine, I would discard it, not realizing that in the future I would have to prove what I was saying. Most of the articles have been located, but not all. Yet this information needs to go out. You, the reader, have strongly requested it. Therefore, wherever I can I will document my statements, but some proofs are lost, at least for the moment. Also, part of the information is from nonscientific sources such as angels or interdimensional communications. We understand that “straight science” needs to be separated from a source who is considered psychic. Scientists are concerned about their credibility. As a side note, I would like to comment that this is similar to a male saying to a female that her feelings are not valid and that only logic is true or valid, that logic must be followed. Naturally, she knows another way; it is the way of life itself. It flows. It has no “male logic,” but it is equally true. I believe in both, in balance. If you can conceive of a person using both science and psychic abilities together to explore the Reality, you have come to the right place. Whenever possible I will differentiate between the two types of sources so that you are clear. This means that you must go within yourself to see if this information is true within your world. If something does not feel right, then discard it and go on. If it feels right, then live it and see if it is really true. But it is my understanding that the mind will never really know the Reality until it has joined with the heart. Male and female complete each other. When you read this work you have two choices: You can come from your left brain, your male side, and take notes and carefully see the logic in each step, or you can come from your right brain, your female side, just let go and don’t think — feel, watch it like a movie, expanded, not contracted. Either way will work. It is your choice.
Alittle less than 13,000 years ago, something very dramatic happened in the history of our planet that we’re going to explore in great detail, because what happened in the past is now affecting every aspect of our life today. Everything we experience in our daily living, including the particular technologies we use, the wars that erupt, the foods we eat and even the way we perceive our lives, is the direct result of a certain sequence of events that happened during the end of Atlantean times. The consequences of these ancient events have entirely changed the way we live and interpret reality. Everything is connected! There is only one Reality and one God, but there are many, many ways that the one Reality can be interpreted. In fact, the number of ways to interpret the Reality are just about infinite. There are certain realities that many people have agreed on, and these realities are called levels of consciousness. For reasons we’ll get into, there are specific realities that extremely large numbers of beings are focusing on, which include the one you and I are experiencing right now. At one time we existed on Earth in a very high level of awareness that was far beyond anything we can even imagine right now. We hardly have even the capability to imagine where we once were, because who we were then is so out of context with who we are now. Because of the particular events that happened between 16,000 and 13,000 years ago, humanity fell from that very high place through many dimensions and overtones, ever increasing in density, until we reached this particular place, which we call the third dimension on planet Earth, the modem world. When we fell—and it was like a fall—we were in an uncontrolled spiral of consciousness moving down through the dimensions of consciousness. We were out of control, and it was very much like falling through space. When we arrived here in the third dimension, certain specific changes took place, both physiologically and in the way we functioned in the Reality.
monstrates what is being talked about. I’m in communication with someone right now who is aware of many levels at once. The scientists who are studying her are speechless; they cannot understand how she does what she’s doing. She might be sitting in a room, yet she claims to be watching from outer space. NASA checked her out by asking her to “see” a specific satellite and give specific information that could be known only if someone were actually there. She gave them readings off their instruments, which I’m sure seemed impossible to the scientists. She said she was flying alongside the satellite and simply read them. Her name is Mary Ann Schinfield. She is legally blind, yet she can walk around a room and no one would know that she cannot see. How does she doit? Recently she called me, and while we were talking she asked if I would like to see through her eyes. Of course I said yes. Within a few breaths, my field of vision opened up, and I was looking at or through what looked like a huge television screen chac filled my field of vision. What I saw was astounding. It seemed that I was moving very fast through space without a body. I could see the stars, and at that moment Mary Ann and I, seeing through her eyes, were moving alongside a string of comets. She was very close to one of them. It was one of the most real out-of-body experiences I have ever had. Around the perimeter of this “TV screen” there were about twelve or fourteen smaller TV screens, each one giving extremely fast images. One of them up in the upper right-hand comer was flashing rapidly moving images such as triangles, light bulbs, circles, wavy lines, trees, squares etc. It was this screen that told her what was in the immediate space where her body was located. She could “see” through these seemingly unrelated images. There was another screen in the bottom left-hand corner where she communicated with other extraterrestrial life that was within this solar system. Here is a person who is in a three-dimensional body on Earth, but has full memory and experience of living in other dimensions. This manner of interrupting the Reality is unusual. People do not normally see inner TV screens, but we do exist in many other worlds even though most of us are not aware of it. You presently exist on probably five or more levels. Though there is a break between this dimension and others, when you connect with your higher self you mend that break, after which you start becoming aware of the higher levels and the higher levels start paying more attention to you— communication begins! This connection to the higher self is probably the most important thing that could happen in your life—more important than understanding any of the information I’ll be giving. Connecting with the higher self is more important than learning to activate the Mer-Ka-Ba, because if you connect yourself to your Self, you will get absolutely clear information on how to proceed step by step through any reality and how to lead yourself back home into the full consciousness of God.
There’s one more component to this picture. I’ll be spending perhaps half of our time on left-brain information like geometries and facts and all kinds of information that to many spiritual people would seem totally unimportant. I’m doing this because when we fell, we divided ourselves into two—really three, but primarily into two—main components, which we call male and female. The right brain, which controls the left side of our body, is our feminine component, though it’s truly neither male nor female. This is where our psychic and emotional aspect lives. This component knows that there’s only one God and that oneness is all there is. Though it can’t really explain it, it just knows the truth. So there are not a lot of problems with the female component. The problem is on the left side of the brain—the male component. Because of the nature of how the male brain is oriented—a mirror image of the female—it has its logical component forward (more dominant), while the female has its logical component toward the back (less dominant). The left brain does not experience oneness when it looks out into the Reality; all it sees is division and separation. For that reason, the male aspect of us is having a difficult rime down here on Earth. Even our major sacred books such as the Koran, the Hebrew Bible and the Christian Bible have divided everything into opposites. The left brain experiences that there is God, but then there’s also the devil—perhaps not quite as strong as God, but a huge influence. So even God is seen in terms of duality, as one pole of the opposing forces of dark and light. (This is not true in all sects of these religions. A few of them see that there is only God.) Undl the left brain is able to see the unity running through everything, to know that there is truly one spirit, one force, one consciousness moving through absolutely everything in existence—until it knows that unity beyond any doubt—then the mind is going to stay separated from itself, from its wholeness and from the fullness of its potential. Even if there’s the slightest doubt at all about unity, the left-brain aspect will hold us back, and we can no longer walk on water. Remember, even Thomas walked on water for a short moment when Jesus asked him to, but one little cell in his big toe said, “Wait a minute, I can’t do this,” and Thomas sank into the cold water of polarity reality.
We’re also going to go into the history of the Earth, because it is very important to our present situation. We cannot really understand how we got here if we don’t know the process that led us to this point. So we’ll spend a considerable length of time talking about what happened a long time ago; then slowly we’ll come forward until we get to what’s going on today. It’s all tied together. The same old thing has been going on all along, and it’s still going on—in fact, it has never stopped. Those of you who are predominantly right-brained may feel inclined to skip this left-brained material, yet it is most important for you to hang in there. It is through balance that spiritual health returns. When the left brain sees absolute unity, it begins to relax and the corpus callosum (the band of fibers joining the two hemispheres) opens in a new way, allowing an integration between the two sides. The link between the left and right brain widens, a flow starts, information is passed back and forth, and the opposing sides of the brain begin to integrate and synchronize with each other. If you’re hooked up for biofeedback, you can actually see this happening. This action turns on the pineal gland in a different manner and makes it possible for your meditation to activate the lightbody of the Mer-KaBa. Then the whole process of regeneration and recovery of our previous higher levels of consciousness can proceed. It is a growth process. If you are studying any other spiritual practice, you do not need to stop in order to begin the work with the Mer-KaBa—unless, of course, your teacher does not want to mix traditions. Other meditations that are based on truth can be extremely useful once the Mer-Ka-Ba is spinning, because then noticeable results can evolve very, very quickly. I will repeat myself just so you know for sure: The lightbody of the Mer-Ka-Ba does not contradict or inhibit any other meditation or religion that upholds the belief that there is only one God. So far we’ve talked only about the ABCs of spirituality. These are just the beginning steps. But these first steps are the most important ones I know. Your left brain may love all this information and file it away in neatly labeled pigeonholes; this is fine. Or you can just relax and read this like an adventure story, a mind-stretcher, a fantasy. However you read it, the fact that you are reading this book is what matters, and you will receive whatever you’re meant to receive. In the spirit of oneness, then, let us embark upon this journey of exploration together.
Many ideas we believe today and “facts” we’ve been taught in school are just not true, and people are now beginning to realize this worldwide. Of course, usually these patterns were believed to be true at the time they were taught, but then concepts and ideas changed, and the next generation was taught different truths. For example, the concept of the atom has changed dramatically so many times over the last ninety years that at this point they don’t really adhere to a concept. They use one, but with the understanding that it may be wrong. At one time the atom was thought to be like a watermelon and the electrons were like seeds inside the watermelon. We really know very little about the Reality that exists around us. Quantum physics has now shown us that the person performing the experiment influences the outcome. In other words, consciousness can change the outcome of an experiment, depending on its belief patterns. There are other aspects of ourselves we hold true that may not be true at all. One idea that has been held for a long time is that we’re the only planet in existence with life on it. In our heart of hearts we know this is not true, but this planet will not admit this truth in modern times even though there is powerful evidence of UFO sightings that have been coming from all over the world nonstop for over fifty years. Any subject other than UFOs would have been believed and accepted by the world had this subject not been so threatening. Therefore, we’re going to look at evidence that suggests there is a higher consciousness in the universe, not only in the stars, but perhaps right here on the Earth.
They say it’s very, very old and very small, and that it’s made out of what they called the “heaviest matter in the universe” (which is close, but not actually correct). And they say that it takes “close to fifty years” for this small star to rotate around Sirius. This is detailed stuff. Astronomers were able to validate the existence of Sirius B, a white dwarf, in 1862, and only about fifteen or twenty years ago could they validate the other information. Now, stars are very much like people, as you will begin to see. They’re alive, and they have personalities and many qualities like we have. On a scientific level, they have growth stages. They start out as hydrogen suns, like ours, where two hydrogen atoms come together in a fusion reaction to form helium. This process creates all the life and light that’s on this planet. As a star further matures, another fusion process begins—the helium process—where three helium atoms come together to form carbon. This growth process continues through various stages until it gets all the way up through a particular level of the atomic table, at which point the star has reached the length of its life span. At the end of its life, as far as we know, there are two primary things a star can do. New data on pulsars and magnetars give other options. One, it can explode and become a supernova, a huge hydrogen cloud that becomes the womb for hundreds of new baby stars. Two, it can rapidly expand into what’s called a red giant, a huge explosion that engulfs all its planets—burns them up and destroys the whole system, then stays expanded for a long time. Then slowly it will collapse into a tiny old star called a white dwarf. What the scientists found rotating around Sirius was a white dwarf, which corresponded exactly to what the Dogons say. Then science checked to see how much it weighed, to see if it really was the “heaviest matter in the universe.” The original computations—made about twenty years ago—determined that it weighed about 2000 pounds per cubic inch. That would certainly qualify for heavy matter, but science now knows that this was an extremely conservative estimate. The newest estimate is approximately 1.5 million tons per cubic inch! Black holes aside, that would surely seem to be the heaviest matter in the universe. This means that if you had a cubic inch of this white dwarf, which is now called Sirius B, it would weigh about one and a half million tons, which would go right through anything you set it on. It would head toward the center of the Earth and actually oscillate back and forth across the core for a long time until friction finally stopped it in the very center. In addition, when they checked the rotational pattern of Sirius B around the larger Sirius A, they found it to be 50.1 years. Now, that absolutely could not be a coincidence! It’s just too close, too factual. Yet how did an ancient primitive tribe know such detailed information about a star that could be measured only in this century? But that is only part of their information. They also knew about all the other planets in our solar system, including Neptune, Pluto and Uranus, which we have discovered more recently. They knew exactly what these planets look like when you approach them from space, which we have also only recently learned. They also knew about red and white blood cells, and had all kinds of physiological information about the human body that we’ve recently learned. All this from a “primitive” tribe! , Naturally, a scientific team was sent over to ask the Dogons how they knew all this. Well, that was probably a big mistake for these researchers, because if they accepted that the Dogons really have this information, then ^ by default they must accept how they got it. When they asked, “How did you learn this?” the Dogons replied that the drawings on the walls of their cave showed them.
This is the moment when Sirius and the Sun and the Earth are in a straight line across space. In Egypt, almost all the temples were aligned with this line, including the gaze of the Sphinx. Many of the temples had a tiny hole in the wall somewhere; then there would be another tiny hole through another wall, then through another wall and another, going into some dim inner chamber. In that chamber there would be something like a cube or Golden Mean rectangle of granite sitting in the middle of the room with a little mark on it. At the moment of the heliacal rising of Sirius, a ruby-red light would strike the altar for a few seconds, which would begin their new year and the first day of the ancient Sothic calendar of Egypt.
So the age of the Sphinx has now been put back to at least 10,000 years, maybe 15,000 or a lot more, and it’s already changing the entire worldview of the people on the cutting edge of archaeology. You see, judging by everything we presently think we know, the oldest civilized people in the world were the Sumerians, and they go back to approximately 3800 B.C. Before that, conventional knowledge says there was nothing but hairy barbarians—no civilization at all anywhere on the whole planet. But now we have something man-made and civilized that’s 10,000 to 15,000 years old. That changes everything! In the past, when something new like this is discovered that has a major influence on the viewpoint of the world, it takes about a hundred years for it to get to the people, for the average person to say, “Oh, yes, that is true!” But this time it’ll happen a lot quicker because of television, computers, the Internet and the way things are today. Now scientific circles, for the first time ever, are actually beginning to look at the words of Plato in a new light when he talked about another culture, another continent, from a dim past called Atlantis. The Sphinx is the largest sculpture on the planet. It was not done by hairy barbarians, but by a very sophisticated culture. And it was not done by anybody we now know here on Earth. From a scientific point of view, this is the first solid evidence to be accepted about the true age of civilization. There has been lots of other evidence, but people just kept putting it under the table. This information on the Sphinx has made a crack in our worldview. This took place about 1990, and the crack is now widening. We now have the accepted evidence that there absolutely had to have been someone on Earth who was highly civilized as early as 10,000 years ago. You can see how that’s going to completely change our view of who we think we are.
He was a little guy, and he looked Egyptian. He had dark skin and his hair was kind of long, but pulled back. He had a clean-shaven face except for a thick beard growing from his chin that was perhaps six inches long and tied in five places. He was dressed in simple tan-colored cotton clothing with long sleeves and pants and sat cross-legged facing me. After my shock wore off, I just looked into this person’s eyes. There I saw something I hadn’t seen before except in babies’ eyes. When you look into a little baby’s eyes, you know how easy it is because there’s nothing going on, no judgment, no nothing. You can just fall into their eyes, and they’ll fall into yours. Well, that’s what it was like to look at this man. There were just these big baby eyes in this old body. He didn’t have anything going on. I had an instant connection with this person, and there were no barriers. He touched my heart like no one had ever done before. Then he asked me a question. He said there were three missing atoms in the universe, and did I know where they were? I had no idea what he meant, so I said, “Well, no.” Then he gave me an experience, which I’m not going to describe, that sent me way back in time to the beginning of creation and brought me forward again. It was a very interesting out-of-body experience. When I came back, I understood what he meant about the three missing atoms—at least I thought I did. And I said, “Well, I think what you mean is this,” and proceeded to tell him what I thought. When I finished, he just smiled, bowed and disappeared. A little later my alchemist teacher reappeared. My teacher didn’t know the change had taken place. Everything that happened seemed to be only in my experience. I went away from that totally preoccupied with the experience. At the time, the angels had me working with four other teachers, so I was going from one to the next to the next, and my life was really full. But I couldn’t think about anything except this little man who had appeared to me. I never asked him who he was, and he didn’t return. Time went on, and finally the experience started to fade away. But I always carried the question, who was that guy? Why did he have me go look for those three atoms, and what was this all about? I had a longing to see him again, because he was the purest person I had ever met—ever. Twelve years later I found out who he was. It was Thoth. On November 1, 1984, he reappeared in my life ... and taught me so much. But again, that’s another story for later.
During those times he was called Chiquetet Arlich Vomalites. His name was actually Arlich Vomalites, and Chiquetet was a title that meant “the seeker of wisdom,” because he really wanted to be what wisdom was. After Atlantis sank (we will discuss this subject in great detail soon), Arlich Vomalites and other advanced beings had to wait for about 6000 years before they could begin to reestablish civilization. When Egypt began to come to life, he stepped forward and called himself Thoth, keeping that name all through the time of Egypt. When Egypt died, it was Thoth who started the next major culture, which was Greece. Our history books say that Pythagoras was the father of Greece and that it was from and through the Pythagorean school that Greece unfolded and from Greece that our present civilization emerged. Pythagoras says in his own writings that Thoth took him by the hand, led him under the Great Pyramid and taught him all the geometries and the nature of the Reality. Once Greece was born through Pythagoras, Thoth then stepped into that culture in the same body he had during the time ofAtlantis and called himself Hermes. So it is written, Arlich Vomalites, Thoth and Hermes are the same person. True story? Read The Emerald Tablets, written 2000 years ago by Hermes. Since that time he’s had many other names, but I still call him Thoth. He came back into my life in 1984 and worked with me just about every day until 1991. He’d come in and spend maybe four to eight hours a day teaching me about so many things. This is where the largest body of the information I’ll be sharing with you came from, though it correlates with other information and has been substantiated by many other teachers. The history of the world, especially, came from him. You see, while in Egypt, where he was called the Scribe, he wrote down everything that took place. He was the perfect person for it, right? He was constantly alive, so as a scribe he would just sit there and watch life go by. He was a good impartial witness, as that was a major part of his understanding of wisdom. He seldom talked or acted except when he knew that it was in divine order. Eventually Thoth discovered how to leave Earth. He would go to another planet where there was life and just sit there and watch. He would never interfere, wouldn’t say a single word. He’d be absolutely silent and just watch —just to see how they lived their lives, to get wisdom, to understand—for maybe a hundred years on each planet. Then he would go somewhere else and watch.
After I had been back from Egypt for three or four months, Thoth came in and said, “I want to see the geometries that were given to you by the angels.” The angels had given me the basic information/geometries of how reality is related to spirit, and the angels had taught me the meditation I’m going to give to you. This meditation was one of the first things Thoth wanted from me. That was the exchange: I received all of his memories and he received the meditation. He wanted the meditation because it was a lot easier than the method he was using. His way of staying alive for 52,000 years was very tenuous—it was like hanging on by a thread. It required him to to spend two hours every day in meditation or he would die. He had to spend one hour with his head to the north and his feet to the south, in a very specific meditation; then he had to spend another hour in the reverse position doing a different meditation. Then once every fifty years, in order to keep his body regenerated, he had to go into what’s called the Halls of Amenti and sit for ten years or so before the Flower of Life. (This is a pure flame of consciousness that resides deep in the womb of the Earth and to which humanity’s level of consciousness is completely dependent for its very existence. More later on this subject.) Thoth was very interested in this new meditation because what took him two hours to accomplish takes only six breaths with the Mer-Ka-Ba meditation. It’s quick, efficient and far more accurate; and its potential is much greater, as it leads into a permanent form of awareness. So Thoth began to give me vast amounts of what he knew. When he would appear in my room, we would not speak with words like we’re doing now. We would speak using a combination of telepathy and holographic images. His thoughts to me were holographic, I guess you would say.
Most people by now are aware that something unusual is going on here on Earth. We are in extremely accelerated time, and many events are happening that have never been seen before. There are more people on the planet than have ever been known before, and if we continue at the same rate, in a few more years we will double our population to about eleven or twelve billion people. Regarding our human evolutionary learning curve, the supply of information on the planet is growing far faster than the population. Here’s a fact according to the Encyclopedia Britannica. From the time of our oldest known human civilization, the ancient Sumerians (circa 3800 B.C.), continuing for almost 5800 years until about A.D. 1900, a certain number of bits of information had been collected, a certain number of so-called facts that were added up to determine precisely how many things we knew. Fifty years later, from 1900 to 1950, our knowledge had doubled. That means it took 5800 years to learn a certain amount, then it took fifty years to double it—amazing! But then in the next twenty years, by about 1970, we doubled it again. It took only ten more years, to about 1980, to double that! Now it’s doubling every few years. Knowledge is coming in like an avalanche. The information was coming so fast in the mid-eighties that NASA couldn’t put it into their computers fast enough. I heard that in approximately 1988 they were eight or nine years behind in simply entering the incoming data. At the same time this avalanche of knowledge is building up, the computers themselves, which are boosting the acceleration, are about to make a huge change. Approximately every eighteen months computers are doubling both speed and memory. First we came out with the 286, then the 386; then we had the 486, and now the 586 is out [this was 1993], which makes the 486 obsolete. We didn’t even know how to use the 486 yet, and here’s the 586. And we’ve already got the 686 planned. By the turn of the century or soon after-ward, a home computer will be so powerful and fast that it will surpass all of the present (1993) computers of NASA and the Pentagon combined. A single computer will be so fast and powerful that it can actually watch the whole Earth and give constant weather data for every square inch of the planet. It will do things that now seem absolutely impossible. And we’re beginning to speed up our ability to enter the data: Now huge amounts of information are entered directly from other computers and scanners and direct voice. So with this incredible amount of knowledge entering into human consciousness, it becomes obvious that a major change for humankind is being birthed. For thousands of years spiritual information was kept secret. Priests and priestesses of various religions or cults would give their lives to keep the rest of the world from knowing about one of their secret documents or piece of spiritual knowledge, making sure it remained secret. All the various spiritual groups and religions around the world had their secret information. Then suddenly, in the mid-sixties, the veil of secrecy was lifted. In unison, almost all the spiritual groups of the world opened their archives at the same moment in history. You can browse through books in your neighborhood bookstore and see information that has been sealed and guarded for thousands of years. Why? Why now? Life on this planet is accelerating faster and faster and faster, obviously culminating in something new and different, perhaps just out of the reach of our normal imagination. We are always changing. What does this mean for the world? Why is it happening? Better yet, why is it happening now? Why didn’t it happen a thousand years ago?
Observing these characteristics of a galactic spiral led to another discovery. Other scientists noticed that as our solar system moves through space, it’s not moving in a straight line, but in a helical pattern, a spiral. Well, such a spiral is not possible unless we are gravitationally connected to an other large body, such as another solar system or something larger. For example, many people think the Moon rotates around the Earth, right? It does not. It never has. The Earth and the Moon rotate around each other, and there’s a third component between them approximately one-third of the distance from the Earth to the Moon, which is the pivotal point, an the Earth and Moon rotate around this point in a helical pattern as the also move around the Sun. This happens because the Earth is connecte with a very large body, which is the Moon. Our moon is huge, and it’s caus ing the Earth to move in a particular pattern. And since the entire solar sy tern is spiraling in the same manner through space, then the whole solar sy tern must be gravitationally connected with some other very large body. So astronomers started searching for this body that was pulling on ou solar system. They first narrowed it down to a certain area of the sky tha we were linked with, then they narrowed it down further and further, unti just a few years ago they finally pinned it down to a specific solar system We are linked with the star Sirius—with Sirius A and Sirius B. Our sola system and the Sirius system are intimately connected through gravitation We move through space together, spiraling around a common center. Ou fate and the fate of Sirius are intimately connected. We are one system! Ever since scientists have known about the dark area inside a spiraling galaxy being different, they have discovered that stars don’t just move ou along the curved arm of a spiral. If someone spun a water hose over hi head and you viewed the scene from above, you would see droplets that ap peared to move in spirals. Can you envision that? Each individual drop though, is not moving in a spiral, but is moving radially away in a straighl line from the center; it only appears to be moving in spirals. It’s the same way in a galaxy. Each of these stars is actually moving radially away. At the same time the stars are moving radially away from the center, they are also moving, independent of the system as a whole, from one arm through the dark light into the white light, orbiting the whole galactic system. It probably takes billions of years—I don’t know—for one cycle to complete itself.
On top of that, all kinds of other problems are occurring. Some things are so scary that governments are afraid to tell you anything at all. They won’t tell you about one thing that I simply have to talk about, because it’s so important that somebody has to say something! I know they don’t want me to talk about this, but I don’t think they’ll stop me. 78 We’re finding CFCs in the upper atmosphere. Now, “authorities” in the government have been saying that CFC products like Freon will float up there because they’re lighter than air. But guess what—and you scientist types can check this out: CFCs are not lighter than air, they’re four times heavier than air. They sink, they don’t rise! So how did they get up there? It might have been the 212 aboveground atomic bombs that our governments have blown off in the world. Many people suspect that’s how all those CFCs got up there in the first place, and that it really wasn’t us who caused most of the problem with our air conditioners. It was the atomic governments o/the world. At one point they all went underground with their bombs, and we thought, That’s okay, they’re bombing underground; nothing will happen now. It’s not okay, folks. It’s probably the most dangerous thing that’s going on in the world today, even more than HAARP, and they’re still doing it. I cannot prove what I am about to say, so do not believe it until you can prove it. Adam Trombly, a famous scientist who has accomplished important work in science, has been monitoring the underground atomic bombing around the world. He probably knows more about this than any other person in the world—even the governments recognize this. Trombly explains what happens when these atomic bombs are exploded underground. The energy doesn’t just sit there; it has to go somewhere, so it goes shooting through the Earth, bouncing off its insides, ripping apart the plates and doing incredible damage as it goes bouncing around like a ping-pong ball. This bouncing effect inside the Earth continues for about 30 days after the l explosion. Trombly, much like Jacques Cousteau and others, now has a theory that predicts all kinds of things that will happen—and they’re all happening Mm! Things like the Indian Ocean dropping 23 feet over a very short period of time was predicted by Trombly at least ten years ago—just as Jacques Cousteau had predicted the death of the Mediterranean Sea in ten years. Many brilliant people are speaking out their truth, but few people are listening. If Trombly is correct, we’re only a few more atomic bombs away from the whole planet literally splitting apart in little pieces. The governments around the world have been on red alert since about 1991 over the changes happening to the Earth that were predicted by Trombly. They’re scared to death. Yet I believe China just blew up another one—and the U.S. is talking about blowing one up just because China did!
The governments are really trying to suppress it. Dr. Strecker made a video memorandum of what he believed happened around AIDS. He is a brilliant person. He has worked with retroviruses and is an expert on this subject. He showed the video on television, and the governments threatened him. They allegedly killed his brother and the senator who was sponsoring it. But they didn’t get Strecker—that would have been too obvious, I guess. Dr. Strecker has distributed many of his videos. He got them out to the world, though you don’t hear about it anymore. Dr. Strecker shows on his film how the United Nations was trying to solve an environmental problem. They knew that the biggest environmental problem in the entire world was the human population, and at the rate it was going, the world would double its population by 2010 or 2012. But because of what the Chinese did, allowing only one child per couple, and other strenuous work around the world, they slowed it down. But they believe that it’s still going to happen. It is now estimated that somewhere around 2014 the world population will have doubled. If that happens, computer models have shown that all life on Earth will die or wish they were dead, according to the United Nations, because we can barely keep it together with almost six billion people. Can you imagine what it would be like with II to 12 billion people in the world7 There’s just no way, at least under the present system. So, if you were in the United Nations and knew this potential disaster was going to take place and had to make a decision, what would you do? I’m not judging the people who did this—just put yourself in their position of great power. You see that the Earth is coming to a solid wall, that it’s going to be totally destroyed if something is not changed. So they made a decision—and Dr. Strecker showed the memorandum right on television. The United Nations decided that, rather than hit that wall of 11 billion people, right then and there they were going to create a virus or a disease that would kill specifically three-quarters of the people on Earth. In other words, instead of increasing to 11 billion, they wanted to reduce the current population by three-quarters. He showed the ac-population by three-quarters. He showed the actual U.N. document that planned to eliminate three-quarters of the world’s population. Dr. Strecker showed scientifically exactly how the U.N. did it. They took a virus from a sheep and a virus from a cow and blended them together in a certain way to make the AIDS virus. But before they ever distributed it, they also made a cure for it. The governments have the cure right now, according to Dr. Strecker. The people who were doing this—and history will verify this—were obviously prejudiced, because they singled out two groups: the Blacks and the homosexuals. In Haiti there was an epidemic of hepatitis B moving through the homosexual community, and they all needed to be injected with the hepatitis B vaccine. So U.N. agents took the AIDS virus, put it in the hepatitis B vaccine and injected it into everyone. That’s how the virus started, according to Dr. Strecker. The other evidence that this is true is that throughout the rest of the world, the virus was not given exclusively to homosexuals. In Africa, where at least 75 million people have AIDS, the ratio of male to female infection is almost exactly 50-50, from the beginning until now. Only in Haiti, and eventually in the United States, did it spread almost exclusively through the homosexual population.
According to Dr. Strecker, the World Health Organization, which has been instrumental in creating this disease, has also been concerned about other diseases—and so have doctors pretty much everywhere. For instance, let’s take cancer: Doctors have been concerned that someday cancer will become contagious, not by pollution or foods or things like this, but that it will become airborne or waterborne, like a cold. You’d just walk by somebody with cancer and you’d get it. But the number of different kinds of cancer viruses is so small that the likelihood of that ever happening is pretty slim. It still could happen, but it’s not likely. But for AIDS, there are 9000 to the 4th power or 6,561,000,000,000,000 totally different kinds of AIDS viruses—that’s a huge number. And every time someone gets AIDS, a brand-new virus is created, one that has never been seen before, ever. This means that it’s inevitable, mathematically speaking—it’s just a matter of time— that AIDS will spread rapidly, just like a cold, throughout the world. There is a story going around that the World Health Organization believes that this rapidly spreading form of AIDS may have already begun. Around 1990 or 1991 the WHO checked an African tribe of 1400 members, including everyone from little babies to old people, who obviously had all different kinds of sexual practices (you know, little babies aren’t int o sexual things), and they found that every single member, without exception, had AIDS. That’s when the WHO announced secretly that the virus was probably now airborne or waterborne, and that it might eventually spread like wildfire, like a common cold. There would be a few years’ lag as with any other new disease. If this were to happen, would you know that you are safe? You need to know the truth—you are more than you know!
We’re going to open a new subject: the history of the world and how it relates to the present. Each one of these pieces of the puzzle widens the view. The situation in which we find ourselves in this world didn’t develop at random. Events occurred that we need to remember. Many of us were here in past lives, and we have these memories within us. But that’s beside the point. We need to know exactly what occurred in order to understand how it developed into this situation today. This history, of course, will not be found in history books, because history books of human “civilization” go back only 6000 years, and we need to go back about 450,000 years to begin. This information was first given to me by Thoth around 1985. Thena after Thoth left in 1991,1 became aware of Zecharia Sitchin, read his works, and found out that Sitchin’s and Thoth’s information were almost perfect fits—so perfect it just couldn’t be a coincidence. It was amazing how close they were. Many things that Thoth had mentioned—such as giants in Atlantis, which he didn’t explain further—were explained in Sitchin’s books. And many things that Sitchin appears to have overlooked were deeply explained by Thoth. So the combination of these two sources gives a very interesting viewpoint. You don’t have to accept this viewpoint; you can just listen to it like a legend, think about it and see if it’s workable for you. If something doesn’t feel true to you, then of course don’t accept it. But I believe this is as close as I can get to the truth, and I offer it to you. Remember, I had to translate the geometrical and hieroglyphic images of Thoth into English. Something is bound to get lost, but I do feel it is close enough to trigger your memories. First you must realize something about written history. Somebody has to hold the pen and write it down, so written history is always the viewpoint of the person or people who wrote it. Written history began only in the last 6000 years, but would that history be the same if it had been written by different people? Consider that in most cases it was the winners of the wars who wrote the history books. Whoever won a war said, “This is what happened.” The losers didn’t get to put in their two cents. Look at any of the major wars, especially World War II, which was a very emotional war. If Hitler had won World War II, our history books would be completely different. We’d be examining a totally different set of “facts.” We would be the bad guys, and they would have shown good reason for doing in the Jews etc. But we won, so we wrote it from our perspective.
According to the Sumerian records, approximately 430,000—perhaps as much as 450,000—years ago the Nefilim started having a problem with their planet. It was an atmospheric problem very much like the ozone problem we’re having right now. And their scientists decided on a solution similar to what our scientists have considered. Our scientists have considered putting dust particles into the ozone layer to filter out the Sun’s damaging rays. Nibiru’s orbit takes it so far away from the Sun that they needed to hold in the heat, so they decided to put gold particles into their higher atmosphere, which would reflect the light and temperature back like a mirror. They planned to get large quantities of gold, pulverize it and suspend it in space above their planet. Yes, it is true that they talked about subjects that seem contemporary—ancient humans talking about ETs and sophisticated science. This is not Star Trek or science fiction; it is real. What they said is pretty amazing, and that’s why it’s been so slow coming out into the general public’s knowledge. The Nefilim had the capability of space travel, though they weren’t at that time much further advanced than we are right now, it appears. The Sumerian records show them in their spaceships with flames coming out the back—rocket ships. This is beginning space travel, not sophisticated. In fact, they were so primitive that they had to wait until Nibiru got near enough to Earth before they could even make the trip between the two planets. They couldn’t just take off any old time, but had to wait until they were close. I believe that since the Nefilim weren’t able to leave the solar system, they searched through all the planets that were here and found that Earth had large quantities of gold. So they sent a team here over 400,000 years ago for one purpose only—to mine gold. The Nefilim who came to Earth were headed by twelve members who were like bosses, about 600 workers who were to actually dig the gold, and about 300 who stayed in orbit in their mothership. They first went into the area of present-day Iraq and began to establish themselves and build their cities, but that’s not where they mined the gold [Fig. 3-9]. For the gold, they went to a specific valley in southeast Africa. One of the twelve, whose name was Enlil, was the leader of the miners. They went deep into the Earth and dug large quantities of gold.
Somewhere between 300,000 and 200,000 years ago the Nefilim workers rebelled. The Sumerian records wrote about this rebellion in great detail. The workers rebelled against their bosses; they did not want to keep digging in the mines. You can imagine the workers saying, “We’ve been digging this gold for 150,000 years, and we’re tired of it. We’re not going to do this anymore.” I would probably have lasted about one month. The rebellion presented a problem for the bosses, so the twelve leaders came together to decide what to do. They decided to take a certain life form that already existed on this planet, which was, as I understand it, one of the primates. Then they would take the blood of the primates, mix it with clay, then take the sperm of one of the young male Nefilim and mix these elements together. The tablet actually shows them with what looks like chemical flasks, pouring something from one flask to another to create this new life form. Their plan was to use the DNA of the primates and their own DNA to create a more advanced race than Earth had at that time so that the Nefilim could control this new race for the sole purpose of mining gold. According to the original Sumerian records, we were created to be miners, as slaves to mine gold. That was our only purpose. And when they mined all the gold they needed to save their own planet, their intention was to destroy our race and leave. They weren’t even going to allow us to live. Now, most people hearing that would think, That can’t be us; we’re too noble for something like that. But that is what the oldest written records on Earth state to be the truth. Remember, Sumerian is the oldest known language in the world, older by far than works such as the Holy Bible and the Koran. It now appears that the Holy Bible was birthed out of the ashes of Sumer. What science has discovered is almost as interesting. In the exact place where the Sumerian records say we mined gold, archaeologists have found gold mines. These ancient gold mines are dated back as far as 100,000 years. What is really incredible is that Homo sapiens (that’s us) were mining gold in these mines. Our bones were found there. Those gold mines had been worked at least 100,000 years ago, and they have dated humans in these mines as early as 20,000 years ago. Now, what the heck were we doing mining gold 100,000 years ago? Why did we need gold? It’s a soft metal, not something you could use like certain other metals. It wasn’t found very often in ancient artifacts. So why were we doing this, and where was it going?
To recapitulate and clarify: After the rebellion, when it was decided to create a new race here on Earth, it was the Nefilim who became the mother aspect. The Sumerian record says seven females stepped forward. Then the Nefilim took clay from the earth, blood from the primate and sperm from the young Nefilim male, mixed this together and put it into the wombs of the young female Nefilim who were chosen for this. They gave birth to human babies. So seven of us were birthed at once, not just one Adam and Eve, according to the original stories—and we were sterile. We could not reproduce. The Nefilim continued procreating little humans, making an army of little beings—us—putting them on the island of Gondwanaland. If you want to believe this story, which is part Sumerian record and part Thoth, our race’s mother is Nefilim and our father is Sirian. Now, if it were not for the Sumerian records concerning the Nefilim, this would all seem absolutely outrageous—and it still does. But there’s a tremendous amount of scientific evidence that this is true if you read the archaeological records—not about the Sirian father, but definitely about the Nefilim mother. Science doesn’t understand how we got here. You are aware that there’s a “missing link” between the last primate and us. We seem to come out of nowhere. They do know that we’re somewhere between 150- and 250,000 years old, but they have no idea where we came from or how we developed. We just stepped through some mystical doorway and arrived.
When the time was right, the Naacals from Lemuria created a spiritual representation of a human brain on the surface of their Atlantean island. Their purpose was to birth a new consciousness based on what they had learned during Lemuria. They believed the brain had to come first before the body of the new consciousness ofAtlantis was to emerge. With Thoth’s image of the human brain in mind, you can begin to make sense of their actions. First they made a wall down the middle of the island about 40 feet high and 20 feet wide, which sealed off one side of the island from the other. Literally, you had to go into the water to get to the other side. Then they ran a minor wall across at 90 degrees to the first wall, which divided the island into four parts. Then half of these thousand people, who were of the Naacal Mystery School, went on one side and half stayed on the other, depending on their nature. That could mean that all the women stayed on one side and all the men went to the other side, but as I understand it, where a person went did not depend on the physical body, but his or her dependency on one side of the brain or the other. In this way, approximately half became the male component of the brain and the other half became the female component. They spent thousands of years in this physical state until they believed they were ready for the next step. Three people were selected to represent the corpus callosum, the part of the brain that links the left and right hemispheres together. Thoth’s father, Thome, was one of these. He and two other people were the only ones allowed to go everywhere on the island. Otherwise, the two sides had to remain completely separate from each other.
Suddenly, in a single day, the brain of Atlantis, the Naacal Mystery School, breathed life into the Tree of Life on the surface of Atlantis. This created vortexes of energy rotating out of each of the circles on the Tree of Life. Once the vortexes were established, then the brain ofAtlantis psychically called forth the children of Lemuria. Millions and millions of Lemurians, who by then had settled along the west coast of North and South America and in other places, began to be pulled to Atlantis. A great migration began, and the ordinary people of the sunken Lemuria started moving toward Atlantis. Remember, they were feminine right-brained beings and inner communication was easy. However, the Lemurian body of consciousness had reached only the age of twelve as a planetary consciousness. It was still a child, and some of its centers weren’t functioning yet; they had worked with those energies and had mastered only eight of the ten. So each migrating Lemurian was attracted to one of these eight centers on Atlantis, depending on the nature of the individual. There they settled and began to build cities. That left two vortexes with nobody using them, not a single person. These two vortexes were pulling life toward them, and in life you just can’t have an empty place. Life will find a way to fill it. For instance, if you’re driving along the freeway following another car and you drop too far behind it, somebody will fill in the gap, right? If you leave a place empty, life will step in and fill it. That’s exactly what happened on Atlantis. Though Lemurians settled into only eight of the vortex areas, Mayan records state clearly that there were ten cities in Atlantis when it fell. In fact, you can see those records in the Troano document, which is now located in the British Museum. This document is estimated to be at least 3500 years old, and it describes in detail the sinking ofAtlantis. It’s Mayan, and it contains an authentic account of the cataclysm, according to Le Plongeon, the French historian who translated it.
The pieces of the comet that crashed into the southwestern area of Atlantis happened to be right where the Martians were living, killing a huge portion of their population. The Martians got hurt the worst by consenting to allow the comet to come in. Well, that was too humiliating and painful for them. This was the beginning of a great loss of consciousness for Earth. What was about to take place was the seed for a bitter tree, the same tree we live by today. The Martians said, “It’s all over. We are divorcing you. We’re going to do whatever we want from now on. You can do whatever you want, but we’re going to lead our own lives and try to control our own fate. And we’re not going to listen to you ever again.” You know this whole number. We’ve seen it in divorced families throughout the world. And the children? Look at our world! We are the children! The Martians decided to take over the Earth, of course. Control, the Martian’s primary interface with the Reality, rose to meet their anger. They began to create a building complex like the one they had constructed on Mars a long time earlier, in order to create a synthetic Mer-Ka-Ba once again. The only thing is, around 50,000 Earth years had passed since they had created one, and they didn’t remember exactly how to do it—but they thought they did. So they built the buildings and began the experiment. That experiment is directly tied to a chain of Mer-Ka-Bas that began with the Mars experiments a little less than a million years before. Later, one was done here on Earth in 1913, another one in 1943 (called the Philadelphia Experiment), another one in 1983 (called the Montauk Experiment), and another one that, I believe, they’re attempting to do this year (1993) near Bimini Island. These dates are windows of time that open up and are tied to the harmonics of the situation. The experiments must be timed to these windows in order to succeed. If the Martians had succeeded in setting up a synthetic harmonic Mer-Ka-Ba, they would have had absolute control of the planet, if that was their intention. They would have been able to make anybody on the planet do anything they wanted, though eventually it would have meant their own demise. No higher-order being would place this kind of control on another if they truly understood the Reality.
The Martians’ attempt to control the world took place near one of the Atlantean islands in the area we now call the Bermuda Triangle. There’s an actual building sitting on the ocean floor down there that contains three rotating startetrahedral electromagnetic fields superimposed on each other, creating a huge synthetic Mer-Ka-Ba that stretches out over the ocean and into deep space. This Mer-Ka-Ba is completely out of control. It’s called the Bermuda Triangle because the apex of one of the tetrahedrons—the stationary one—is sticking up out of the water there. The other two fields, are counterrotating—and the faster-rotating field sometimes moves clockwise, which is a very dangerous situation. (When we say clockwise, we mean the source of the field, not the field itself. The field itself would appear to be rotating counterclockwise.) You’ll understand this when you learn more about the Mer-Ka-Ba. When the faster field rotates counterdocfewise (from its source), everything’s okay; but when the faster one moves clockwise (from its source), that’s when time and space distortions happen. Many of the airplanes and ships that have disappeared in the Bermuda Triangle have literally gone into other dimensional levels because of the out-of-control field there. A primary cause of much of the distortion in the world—the distortion between humans such as wars, marital problems, emotional disturbances etc.—is that imbalanced field. That field is not only causing distortions on Earth, it’s causing distortions way, way, way out in remote areas of space because of the way Reality is constructed.
At the time of the synthetic Mer-Ka-Ba failure, there were about 1600 ascended masters on Earth, and they did everything they could to try to heal the situation. They tried to seal the dimensional levels and get as many of these spirits as they could out of people and back into their own worlds. They did everything on every level they could. They eventually got most of the spirits out and healed about 90 to 95 percent or more of the situation, but people still found many of these unusual beings living in their bodies. The situation at that time began to deteriorate extremely rapidly. All the systems on Atlantis—financial, social and all the concepts of how life ought to be—degenerated and collapsed. The continent of Atlantis and all its people became sick. They started getting weird diseases. The entire continent went into a state of survival just trying to live through each day. The situation grew continually worse. For a long period of time it was hell on Earth, horrible. If it had not been slowed down by the ascended masters, it would truly have been the end of this world. The ascended masters (the highest levels of our consciousness at that time) didn’t know what to do to help bring us back into a state of grace. I mean they really didn’t know what to do. They were children compared to the events that had been forced upon them, and they had no idea how to handle it. So they prayed. They called in higher levels of consciousness. They called in everybody who could hear their plea, including the great Galactic Command. They prayed and prayed. So the problem was reviewed on many high levels of life. Similar kinds of events have happened before on other planets; this wasn’t the first time. So before it actually happened, our ascended masters and galactic friends knew that we were going to fall out of grace, out of the high level of awareness we were experiencing at the time. They knew that we were going to fall way down the spectrum of life. Their concern was to figure out some way to get us back up on track after the fall, and they knew it had to be done quickly. They were looking for a solution that would heal the whole Earth, both the dark and the light. They weren’t concerned with a solution where only the Martians would be healed, or only the Lemurians or only part of the Earth. They were looking for a situation that would heal the whole Earth and all of its inhabitants.
These people took their picture to Australia and conducted a study there. They selected a certain number of people from a spectrum of the population, then showed each of them the picture, giving them a certain length of time to look at it. They held the photograph up to someone and said, “How many faces do you see in this photo?” During the time the subjects were given, they would generally come up with six, seven, eight, nine or maybe ten faces. Few people saw more. When they had gotten a few hundred people as their basic sampling and recorded accurately what had been observed, some of the researchers went to England—on the other side of the planet—and showed the picture on a closed-cable BBC television station that broadcasts only to England. They carefully showed where all the faces were, every single face. Then a few minutes later other researchers repeated the original experiment with new subjects in Australia. Suddenly people could easily see most of the faces. From that moment, they knew for certain that there was something about humans that had not been known. Now, the Aborigines in Australia had known about this “unknown” part of us for a long time. They knew that there was an energy field connecting people. Even in our society, we’ve observed that somebody on one side of the planet would invent something very complex at the same moment that someone on the other side of the Earth invented the same thing, with the same principles and ideas. Each inventor would say, “You stole it from me. It was mine. I did it first.” This has happened many, many times, stretching back for a long time. So after this Australian experiment, they began to realize that something very definitely connects us all.
Now that we have the necessary background, we can continue with the drama in Atlantis. The project to rebuild the grid was begun by three men: Thoth, a being named Ra and a being named Araragat. These men flew to a place in what is now Egypt, to the area now called the Giza plateau. At that time it was not a desert, but a tropical rain forest, and it was called the Land of Khem, which means the land of the hairy barbarians. The three men went to that particular place because the axis of the old unity-consciousness grid extended out of the Earth from that point. They were going to rebuild a new grid on the old axis, according to instructions given by higher consciousness. They had to wait until the right moment—until the precession of the equinoxes passed the low ebb in consciousness—before they could act, and this low ebb was still far into their future. After that they would have a little less than half a cycle, about 12,900 years or so, to complete everything by the end of the twentieth century. We couldn’t go any longer than this or we would destroy ourselves and our planet. First they had to complete the grid on the higher dimensions, then they had to physically build the temples in this dimension before the new unity grid would manifest. Once manifested and balanced, they were to help us begin to consciously move into the higher worlds of being and begin anew our path home to God.
So Thoth and friends went to the very spot where the unity-consciousness vortex exited the Earth. This point was about a mile away from where the Great Pyramid sits in the desert today, but then it was out in the middle of nowhere, in the middle of a rain forest. Centered right over the axis of this vortex on the Earth, they created a hole extending approximately one mile into the Earth, lining it with bricks. It took only a few minutes or so, because they were sixthdimensional beings, and whatever they thought always happened. It was that simple. Once the hole aligned with the unity axis was created, they mapped the ten Golden Mean spirals that emerged from the hole and located where they moved above the Earth. They used the hole as the axis, starting far down, and mapped the spirals of energy as they moved up out of the hole and extended into space. One of the spirals exited the Earth not far from the present Great Pyramid. Once they found it, they built a little stone building in front of the hole; that building is the key to the entire Giza complex. Then they built the Great Pyramid. According to Thoth, the Great Pyramid was built by himself, not Cheops. Thoth says that it was completed about 200 years prior to the shifting of the axis. The apex of the Great Pyramid, if the capstone were in place, sat exactly on the curve of the spiral. They lined up the center of the hole with the south face of the stone building and the north face of the Great Pyramid. It has amazed surveyors who have looked at this. Though these structures are a mile away from each other, the south face of the stone building and the north face of the Great Pyramid are in perfect alignment. They do not believe that we could do it any better today even with our modern technology. Later the other two pyramids were also built directly on that spiral. In fact, that’s how the hole was discovered, through aerial photography. They noticed that the three pyramids were laid out on a logarithmic spiral. Then they traced the spiral back to its source and went to that spot, and there was the hole and the stone building. That discovery was made, I believe, in the early 1980s. It was recorded in the McCollum survey that was completed in 1984 by Rocky McCollum. I’ve seen the axis hole and the building with my own eyes. I consider it to be the most important place in all of Egypt and so does the Edgar Cayce A.R.E. There’s also another hole about a city block away from the first spiral, and this spiral starts out a little differently, but then slowly, asymptotically, superimposes itself over the first spiral. To be able to build around this hole in this spiral pattern, the planners had to have a very sophisticated understanding of life. (I’ll explain this understanding later also.) So these two completed spirals defined the axis of what would eventually become the unityconsciousness grid around the Earth.
The location of the sacred sites of the world are no accident. It was a single consciousness that created every single one of them—from Machu Picchu to Stonehenge to Zaghouan—you name it, to anywhere. Almost all of them (with a few exceptions) were created by a single awareness. We’re becoming more aware of this now. Richard Hoagland’s work brings this forth, though he wasn’t the first one. They show how one sacred site is extrapolated from another one, then another and still another. These sites go beyond time, in that they were all built at different times, and they go beyond any particular culture or geographical location. They were obviously done by one consciousness who coordinated the whole enterprise. Eventually researchers will see that this spot in Egypt is the point from which all the other sacred sites were calculated. This Egyptian area is the north pole of the unity-consciousness grid. On the other side of the planet, out in the South Pacific in the Tahitian Islands, is a little island called Moorea, where the south pole of the grid is located. For those of yo u who have been on top of Wayna Picchu for a birds-eye view, Machu Picchu, at about 9000 feet in the Peruvian mountains, seems to be surrounded in a perfect circle by mountains. It’s like a female circle surrounding a phallus rising in the middle. Well, the island of Moorea is similar to this, only it’s shaped like a heart. Each house on Moorea has a heart with the house number on it. The phallic Moorean mountain in the center of the heart is much bigger than Wayna Picchu in Peru, but you will still see the same ring of mountains surrounding this earthen pole. This is the precise south pole of the entire unity-consciousness grid. If you go straight through the Earth at Moorea, you come out in Egypt. It’s off only an ever so tiny bit—there’s a very slight curve, which is natural. The Moorean pole is negative, or female, and the Egyptian pole is positive, or male. All the sacred sites are connected to the Egyptian pole, and they’re all interlinked through the central axis leading to Moorea. It’s a torus, of course.
According to Thoth, the Sphinx goes back at least five and a half million years. I guess eventually that will be brought forth, because he hasn’t been wrong about anything yet. Even John Anthony West secretly suspects that it is a great deal older than 10- to 15,000 years. He wasn’t concerned with making speculations into the millions of years; he just wanted to get it well past the 6000-year mark, because that will crack our previously accepted Earth history. He and his team have now done that, and later, I believe, they’ll try to push the date back further as they introduce more evidence. According to Thoth, approximately one mile under the Sphinx there is a round room with a flat floor and a flat ceiling. Inside this room is the oldest synthetic object in the world—older than any other consciously assembled matter on Earth. According to Thoth, though even he can’t prove it, this object goes back 500 million years when “that which led to human life” began. The object is about two city blocks in size; it’s round like a disk and has a flat bottom and top. It’s unusual in that its skin is only three to five atoms thick. Its top and bottom surfaces have a certain pattern that’s shown in Figure 4-8. The pattern itself is five atoms thick; everywhere else it’s only three atoms thick. And it’s transparent—you can see right through it—almost like it’s not there. This is a ship, but it has no motors or visible form of power. Even though Doreal’s interpretation of The Emerald Tablets states that this ship had atomic motors in it, according to Thoth it does not. Doreal translated The Emerald Tablets in the Yucatan in 1925 and could not understand the description of how the ship was powered. The idea of atomic motors was the farthest-out idea he could think of for a power source. But it is actually propelled by thoughts and feelings, and is designed to connect with and extend your own living Mer-Ka-Ba. This ship is connected directly to the spirit of the Earth, and in The Emerald Tablets it’s called a warship. It was the protector for the Earth.
rain forest and went back to Atlantis to prepare. It sat alone for 200 years, because they knew that at that critical point in the precession of the equinoxes, the poles would shift. They knew that Atlantis would sink, so they waited. One day it finally happened. The catastrophe actually took only one night. Science has proven that when poles shift, it takes about 20 hours. It happens just like that [snaps fingers]. You wake up one normal day, and that evening it’s a totally different world. The whole process is about three and a half days long, but the pole shift happens in about 20 hours. We’re all going to experience this enormous change when we see big chunks of the United States start to drop off into the water—then you’ll know it’s for sure. There are other early signs that will tip you off that the change is about to happen. When enough information has been given, I’ll remind you of what you already hold in your memories. When they saw the very first signs of the shift coming on, Thoth, Ra and Araragat returned to the Sphinx and raised the warship into the sky. All they did was raise the vibration of the molecules only one overtone higher than the Earth exists on. This allowed them and the ship to pass right through the Earth into the sky. Then they moved to Atlantis, lowered the ship to the surface, and picked up the people of the Naacal Mystery School, which included the original immortals from Lemuria as well as those who became enlightened during the time of Atlantis (by that time about another 600 people had ascended). So the original thousand from Lemuria and the 600 from Atlantis had increased the number of ascended masters to about 1600, the only occupants of the ancient airship.
Its connection to the Earth’s magnetic field is not understood by science at this time. If you don’t have a means of protecting your memory, it will be erased, gone. It’ll be like unplugging a computer in the middle of a file. It’s just gone. That’s exactly what happened to the Atlanteans and others who survived the catastrophe but who didn’t have spinning Mer-Ka-Bas. Those very sophisticated people, who were more advanced than you and I, suddenly found themselves in a situation where they didn’t know anything. They had high-tech bodies and high-tech minds, but it was like having a great PC sitting on the table with no software, nothing there. So the population that survived, and there were a few, had to start all over again. They had to begin at square one to figure out how to stay warm, how to make fire and so on. This loss of memory was the result of their forgetting how to breathe, forgetting their Mer-Ka-Bas, forgetting everything—falling down through the dimensions, going into a totally unprotected state and ending up in this very dense world—having to eat food again, doing all kinds of things that hadn’t been part of our experience for a very long time. They were slammed into a very dense aspect of the planet and had to learn to survive all over again. This was all a result of the synthetic Mer-Ka-Ba experiment that had taken place on Atlantis. Without that small group of ascended masters, we would not have survived at all—we definitely would all have left human experience. The whole Earth experiment would have been over forever. But they kept the field alive, just barely, while everything else crashed around them. Besides the ascended masters, there were also two other groups on Earth who had Mer-Ka-Ba fields intact at the time. The Nefilim and the Sirians, our mother and father, kept their fields alive. I don’t know where the Nefilim retreated to within this planet’s dimensional worlds, but the Sirians remained in the Halls of Amend, inside the inner earth. Both of these groups are still here on the planet, hidden within the dimensional worlds.
Egypt became the male component of the grid. That is where the male structures were laid out. There’s hardly any femaleness there compared to female areas of the world. Of course, the polarity to maleness does exist— Isis is that counterpart—but the overall energy flow is male. South America, especially Peru, Central America and also parts of Mexico became the female component of the grid. However, ultimately the entire female aspect of the grid became centered at the complex in Uxmal, in the Yucatan, where many survivors from Atlantis had found refuge. Starting at Uxmal, seven temples are laid out in a spiral, probably a Fibonacci spiral, and they are the seven primary temples of the female component of the grid. These are chakra centers, just like the chakra centers that are laid out down the length of the Nile. These feminine centers begin with Uxmal, then go to Labna, then to Kabah, then over to Chichen Itza, then over to Tulum near the ocean, then way down near Belize to Kohunlich, curving back inland to Palenque. Those seven places created the primary spiral of the feminine aspect of the grid being created for our new Christ consciousness, which we are only now able to access. From Palenque the feminine aspect of the grid splits north and south. Here we see another polarization of the energy. The feminine component of the female spiral of the grid heads south and jumps over to Tikal in Guatemala, and that begins a new octave. When we relate it to music, the seventh site bridges to the eighth note, or the beginning of the next octave of the next spiral. And the spiral keeps going south through the feminine component of the grid. Eventually it moves through places like Machu Picchu and Sacsayhuaman near Cuzco, Peru. One of the main spirals ends in a place called Chavin, in Peru, which was the primary religious center of the Incan empire. From there it goes to Lake Titicaca to a place about a half a mile off the Island of the Sun in Bolivia. Then it makes a 90-degree turn and heads out toward Easter Island and finally to Moorea, where it anchors into the Earth. Heading north from Palenque is the male component of the female aspect of the grid. It goes through the Aztec ruins and up through the American Indian pyramids. (The American Indians made physical pyramids, some remains of which can be seen in and around Albuquerque, New Mexico.) Then the spiral continues to Blue Lake near Taos, New Mexico, which is the counterpart of Lake Titicaca. This is one of the most important areas in the United States, protected for a long time by the Taos Indians. Again, there’s a 90-degree turn at Blue Lake. From there the spiral heads out across the mountains, going through Ute Mountain (on the New Mexico side of the Colorado border) and through many mountains and structures that have been built.
In conjunction with the sacred sites, the creators also used mountains because of their vortex energy. Finally, before the spiral leaves the coast of California, it passes through Lake Tahoe, Donner Lake and Pyramid Lake. From there it goes through underwater mountain complexes until it reaches the Hawaiian Islands, where Haleakala Crater is one of the primary components, then heads south again. It goes through the Hawaiian Island chain that connects for thousands of miles all the way back to Moorea. So it’s a huge open circle that comes around the Earth, starting at Uxmal and connecting at the south pole of the Christ grid. The feminine component of the grid is a massive circle of complexes. Understand that in between each of the major sites mentioned above are literally hundreds of smaller sites—churches and temples of many religions, sacred sites of nature such as mountain peaks and ranges, lakes, canyons and so on. If you could see the greater plan, you would see how they form perfect spirals, first moving clockwise, then moving counterclockwise until they reach their destination, Moorea, in the South Pacific. The pyramids built in the Himalayan mountains were primarily crystalline in nature, meaning they were constructed by using third-dimensional crystals at the corners, aimed to form a pyramid. They built physical pyramids there, too—lots of them. Most of them are not known, though some are. The largest known pyramid in the world so far is in the western mountains of Tibet. It’s a solid-white pyramid that’s in almost perfect condition, with a huge, solid-crystal capstone. At least two teams of scientists have been there, and it has also been photographed from the air. It’s visible only three weeks out of the year when its crystal capstone peers out of the deep snow to view a valley long deserted from human endeavor. I talked with the leader of the team that went into this pyramid. He said it looks like a brand-new pyramid and that there’s nothing written on the walls. It’s white, smooth and hard, like marble. When they entered it, they went down a long tunnel, where they found a large room in the center. There’s no writing anywhere, no designs, no nothing—except that in the middle, high up on a wall, there is one inscription—the Flower of Life! That’s it. If you want to say everything, all you have to do is put that on a wall. That says it all. By the end of this book you’ll understand why.
According to Thoth, there are five different levels of human consciousness possible here on Earth. These are people who have different DNA, completely different bodies and different ways of perceiving the Reality. Each level of consciousness grows from the last one, until finally on the fifth level humanity learns how to translate into a whole new manner of expressing life, leaving Earth forever. The primary visual difference between these types is their height. The first-level people are about 4 to 6 feet tall. The second-level people are about 5 to 7 feet tall, where we are at now. Third-level people are about 10 to 16 feet tall, which we are about to translate to. The fourth-level being is about 30 to 35 feet tall, and the last is about 50 to 60 feet. These last two levels are for the distant future. This may seem strange at first, but do we not begin as a microscopic egg and get larger and larger until we are born? Then we continue to grow taller and taller until we are adults. According to this theory, the human adult is not the end of our growth pattern. We continue through DNA steps until we are 50 to 60 feet tall. Metatron, the Hebrew archangel who is the perfection of what humanity is supposed to become, is 55 feet tall! Remember the giants who lived here on Earth referred to in chapter 6 of Genesis? According to the Sumerian records, they were about 10 to 16 feet tall. When we look at a three-year-old and a ten-year-old, we know that they have different levels of consciousness, and it is primarily by their height that we make this judgment. According to Thoth, each level of consciousness has different DNA; however, the primary difference is the number of chromosomes. Using this theory, we are now on the second level and have 44+2 chromosomes. An example of the first level is certain aboriginal tribes in Australia where they have 42+2 chromosomes. On the third level, which we are about to move to, people have 46+2 chromosomes. The next two levels have 48+2 and 50 + 2, respectively. We will discuss this in depth in the second volume of this book and show the sacred geometry around this understanding, which will make it clear.
After Akhenaten was gone, the 300 immortal Egyptians joined the Tat Brotherhood and waited from roughly 1350 B.C. to about 500 B.C.—about 850 years or so. Then they migrated to a place called Masada, Israel, and formed the Essene Brotherhood. Even today Masada is known as a capital of the Essene Brotherhood. These 300 people became the inner circle, and mostly ordinary people formed an outer circle, which became very large. Mary, the mother of Jesus, was one of the members of the inner circle of the Essene Brotherhood. She was immortal even before Jesus became immortal. Joseph came from the outer circle. This is according to Thoth; it’s not written in the records. It was part of the Egyptian plan that the next step would be to bring in someone who would demonstrate exactly how to become immortal when starting as an ordinary human, put the experience into the akashic records and make it real. Somebody had to do it. According to Thoth, Mary and Joseph came together and mated interdimensionally (which we’ll talk about later) to create the body for Jesus, which would allow his consciousness to come in from a very, very high level. When Jesus first came in, he began life on Earth as human as any of us. He was totally human. And through his own work he transformed himself to the immortal state through resurrection, not through ascension, and put into the akashic records the process of exactly how to do it. This is according to Thoth, and it was planned a long, long time before it ever took place.
We’re going to begin with a realization that the Christian and the Egyptian understandings of Reality are almost identical. The Christian understanding is derived from the Egyptian. Here are the first three sentences of the Christian Bible: “In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. And the earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep, and the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. And God said, ‘Let there be light,’ and there was light.” To begin with, this statement that the Earth was without form until it came out of the Void, out of nothing, is exactly what the Egyptians believed. It’s also what many other religions believe. Both Egyptian and Christian religions believe that all that’s needed to start the process of creation is nothing and spirit, and when those two concepts are brought together, then all things can be created. They believe that creation begins by the movement of spirit. In the second sentence it says, “The earth was without form and void” and that the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. Then in the very next sentence, God says, “Let there be light.” The movement happened first, then the light happened immediately after. According to the Egyptian belief, one tiny detail was left out of the current Christian Bibles. It isn’t necessarily wrong in the older Bibles, though. There are 900 versions of the Bible in the world, and in many of the older ones the first sentence says, “In the beginning there were six.” It starts out in other ways too; it’s been changed many times over the years. The ancient Egyptians would say that the way our modern Bibles begin creation is impossible, especially if you think about it from a physics point of view. Imagine a dark, infinite space that goes on forever and ever in all directions. There’s nothing in it—just infinite space with nothing in it. Imagine yourself—not your body, but your consciousness—being in the middle of that. You’re just floating there with nothing. You can’t really fall, because where would you fall to? You wouldn’t know if you’re falling down or going up or off to the side; in fact, there’s no way to experience any motion at all. From a purely physics or mathematical point of view, motion itself, or kinetic energy, is absolutely impossible in a void. You can’t even rotate, because motion cannot become real until there’s at least one other object in the space around you. There has to be something to move relative to. If you don’t have something relative to move to, how would you know you’re moving? I mean, if you went up thirty feet, how would you know that? There’s no change. With no change, there’s no movement. So the ancient Egyptians would say that before God “moved upon the face of the waters,” He/She had to first create something to move relative to.
