The advent of “new media” (in common parlance, a loose conglomeration of phenomena such as the Internet, digital television, interactive multimedia, virtual reality, mobile communication, and video games), has challenged many scholars to investigate the media culture of late modernity. Research agendas vary from network analysis to software studies; from mappings of the new empire of network economies to analyses of new media as “ways of seeing” (or hearing, reading, and touching). Efforts have been made to pinpoint where the “newness” of social networking, interactive gaming, or data mining lies and to lay the foundations for “philosophies” and “languages” of new media. For some researchers, the main concerns are social or psychological, while for others they are economical and ideological, or motivated by search for technological determinants behind the myriad manifestations of media. As different as these approaches may be, studies of new media often share a disregard for the past. The challenges posed by contemporary media culture are complex, but the past has been considered to have little to contribute toward their untangling. The new media have been treated as an all-encompassing and “timeless” realm that can be explained from within. However, signs of change have begun to appear with increasing frequency. Numerous studies and collections addressing the media’s past(s) in relation to their present have appeared in recent years. This influx of historically oriented media studies must be greeted with a cheer. Still, one cannot avoid noticing how little attention has often been devoted to defining and discussing methods and approaches. The past has been visited for facts that can be exciting in themselves, or revealing for media culture at large, but the nature of these “facts” has often been taken as a given, and their relationship to the observer and the temporal and ideological platform he or she occupies left unproblematized.
Years before Perriault, the word archaeology had been used in the title of C. W. Ceram’s Archaeology of the Cinema (1965). Ceram, whose real name was Kurt Wilhelm Marek (1915–72), was a well-known popularizer of archaeology. Yet applied to the prehistory of cinema his idea of “archaeology” hardly differed from the goals of traditional positivistic historical scholarship. Ceram presented a strictly linear and teleological account about the developments that led to the cinema, breaking off his narrative in 1897, the year that, according to him, “saw the birth of the cinema industry.” Ceram focused on inventors and the technical steps that led to cinematography. Everything that did not fit neatly into this narrative was left out, no matter how interesting it might otherwise have been. The illustrations, selected by the British scholar Olive Cook (mostly from the great collection of John and William Barnes), told an entirely different story, pointing out phenomena and potential connections omitted by Ceram. This was an interesting rupture, embodying a tension between two very different notions about the history of the moving image. The word archaeology later appeared in the title of Laurent Mannoni’s Le grand art de la lumière et de l’ombre: Archéologie du cinéma (1994). A change of emphasis is clear. Based on an extensive consultation of archival material (which justified the use of the word archaeology), Mannoni’s book no longer tried to present a closed historical narrative arranged as a set of interconnected causal chains inevitably leading toward cinema. Rather, the five-hundred-page volume consists of a succession of carefully researched case studies of different facets of the moving image culture, covering several centuries. Although there is a strong emphasis on technology, Mannoni also discusses its applications and discursive manifestations. Piece by piece, a narrative develops, but one that does not pretend to be complete or to hide its gaps. Although Mannoni’s discourse stays close to the sources, avoiding theoretical speculation, the book invites new insights, opening paths for further interpretations.
Marshall McLuhan introduced a new approach, new combinations, and new themes to the study of media. His early work The Mechanical Bride (1951) developed a critique of contemporary mass media, drawing occasional parallels with mythology and history, and shifting between high culture and popular culture with apparent ease and (and some took it) recklessness. In The Gutenberg Galaxy (1962) McLuhan’s vision came to embrace the history of media in a more rigorous sense as he traced the dynamics between orality, the Gutenbergian printing revolution, and the new orality represented by televisual media. Instead of providing a neutral and linear narrative, McLuhan’s idiosyncratic discourse surfaced as an essential element. The materiality and the processual nature of his discourse was further emphasized in the collagelike books (The Medium Is the Massage, War and Peace in the Global Village, and Counterblast) that he produced with the graphic designer Quentin Fiore following the international success of Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man (1964). McLuhan’s influence on media archaeologists has been manifold. Of utmost importance is his emphasis on temporal connections, translations, and mergers between media, something that inspired Jay David Bolter and Richard Grusin to develop their notion of “remediation” and to use it to investigate how features of earlier media forms are subsumed into digital media. Bolter’s and Grusin’s endeavor was not defined as “media archaeology,” but it has affinities with the ways media archaeologists draw parallels between seemingly incompatible phenomena. McLuhan’s understanding of “media” and “medium” was broad and challenged existing dichotomies, like those between material things and notions of the mind. His ideas of new media as “extensions” and as driving forces for changes in society have influenced the German “media materialist school” of media archaeology through the work of Friedrich Kittler. Last but not least, McLuhan’s unwillingness to stick with formal “methods” and fixed sets of concepts, as well as his self-reflective play with his own discourse, seems to appeal to “anarchistically minded” media archaeologists, determined to keep their approaches free from institutional-theoretical dogmas and infections.
Siegfried Giedion’s Mechanization Takes Command (1948) presented a detailed account about the forms and impact of mechanization. Ranging from techniques for capturing human movements as graphic representations to the features of everyday household objects like the bathtub, Giedion’s history had less to do with isolated apparatuses than with their interconnections. Mechanization was presented as a depersonalized force that infiltrated Western societies down to the minutest details of everyday life. Giedion was mainly concerned with material culture, “the tools that have molded our present-day living.”  The “anonymous history” he proposed looked for a synthesis between Geistesgeschichte and positivism, where every detail was “directly connected with the general, guiding ideas of an epoch. But at the same time it must be traced back to the particulars from which it rises.”  Even earlier, the German cultural critic Walter Benjamin had already projected a kind of anonymous history, but one that involved discursive layers of culture to a much greater extent than Giedion’s largely materialist vision. Benjamin is arguably the most prominent forerunner—beside Foucault—of media-archaeological modes of cultural analysis and is a major influence for cultural studies. In particular, his unfinished Arcades Project (Passagen-Werk) became a case study about the kinds of issues media archaeologists deal with.25 Benjamin’s reconstruction of nineteenth-century culture, with Paris as its capital, relied on a multitude of sources, including texts, illustrations, urban environments, architecture, public spectacles like the panorama and the diorama, and objects deemed to be emblematic of the era. The approach was remarkably open, shifting, and layered and took political and economic but also collective psychological factors into consideration. Beside material forms, Benjamin’s work illuminated the “dream worlds” of consumerism and early modernity. Working against the tidal wave of Geistesgeschichte, Benjamin refused to group the massive evidence he had gathered under any single symbol deemed characteristic of the era. Such persistence is one of the reasons why the work remained unfinished. The readers were left with a huge collection of notes, images, and ideas that constitute a database rather than a preorganized narrative. Benjamin offered meditations on time, spatiality, nature, and emergent modernity as a new realm of sensations. The concept and method of allegory that he had already developed in his earlier work referred to alternative ways of seeing temporality not as an organic succession but through the figures of ruins and decay. The interest in change and the “ruins” of the body and mind were evident in his other works as well, which famously touched on historical changes in the modes of perception.
Both Benjamin and Sternberger were interested in the panorama as a visual manifestation of the nineteenth-century culture. However, their approaches differ in important respects. For Benjamin the panorama was just one of the manifestations of the larger topic he was trying to get hold of, while for Sternberger it became nothing less than the organizing metaphor for his portrait of an era, the key to unlock the secrets of, in the words of his book’s subtitle, “how nineteenth century man saw himself and his world and how he experienced history.” In his book Sternberger deals less with concrete panoramas than with their manifestations in cultural phenomena as diverse as steam power, railway travel, the Western idea of the Orient, the theory of evolution, and domestic lighting. While this totalizing idea clearly derived from the ideology of the Geistesgeschichte, it may also bear certain similarities with the ways Foucault dealt with his “epistemes.” In the early decades of the twentieth century, art history also began proposing ways of recontextualizing art within textual traditions and expanding its own reach to visual material that had traditionally been left outside its confines. A reevaluation of “neglected traditions” has been proposed by Horst Bredekamp, who has related the theories of Bildwissenschaft that emerged in Germany to pioneering approaches toward technology and media in the early twentieth century. Around 1900–1933, according to Bredekamp, a new “science of the image” emerged in the German-speaking world with radical ideas about the continuities between different genres of images from advertisements and photography to film and political iconography. The art historian Aby Warburg and scholars he influenced, like Ervin Panofsky and E. H. Gombrich, stood out as “picture-historians,” interested more in recurring visual motifs and their contextualization than in weeding the popular out of art history. Warburg’s unfinished “Mnemosyne Atlas” (which in some ways resembles Benjamin’s Arcades Project) suggested a nonlinear way of understanding the temporal recurrence of images and their relations, raising also the issue of “intermediality” by pointing out motifs that shifted and transformed across what we would now call media platforms. Furthermore, the project suggested a new idea about dynamics of the image, pointing out how images and motifs in themselves could function as “time-machines” in an isomorphic fashion to the task of media archaeology. Another unconventional work that anticipated some of the concerns of media archaeology was André Malraux’s Musée imaginaire (trans. Museum without Walls), published in 1947. Malraux discussed the ways in which mechanical reproduction, in particular photography, was changing our understanding of images and visual culture in general (without referring to Benjamin’s “Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction,” 1936). He demonstrated how the unprecedented availability of reproductions was turning the past into an archive, and he challenged observers to draw connections between visual traditions and motifs that had until then been considered unrelated.
The work of Michel Foucault has had a strong impact on media archaeology. An archaeology of his “archaeology of knowledge” would be useful but cannot be developed here. When classifications of media archaeology have been attempted, a binary division has usually been drawn between the socially and culturally oriented Anglo-American studies and the techno-hardware approach of German scholars, who have taken their cue from Friedrich Kittler’s synthesis of Foucault, information theory, media history, and McLuhan’s emphasis on the medium as the message. The German tradition has been claimed to emphasize the role of technology as a primum mobile, which has led to accusations about technological determinism, whereas Anglo-American scholars often assume that technology gets its meanings from preexisting discursive contexts within which it is introduced. One way of explaining this division is to see it as a consequence of different readings of Foucault. The Anglo-American tradition has valorized Foucault as a thinker who emphasized the role of discourses as the loci where knowledge is tied with cultural and social power. Material bodies, events, and institutions are all conditioned by discursive formations. The effects of “hard” technology are considered secondary to immaterial forces that differentiate and mediate their uses. We find quite different readings of Foucault in the German variant of media archaeology, which was strongly influenced by Kittler’s Aufschreibesysteme 1800/1900 (1985), his pathbreaking habilitation thesis that dealt with the impact of technical media on nineteenth-century literature and writing practices. It was followed by Grammophon Film Typewriter (1986), which shared the same basic premises but focused more directly on technical media. Kittler argued for the need to adjust Foucault’s emphasis on the predominance of words and libraries to more media-specific ways of understanding culture. According to him, the problem was that “discourse analysis ignores the fact that the factual condition is no simple methodological example but is in each case a techno-historical event.”  To be able to understand media technologies from the typewriter to the cinema and on to digital networks and coding paradigms, one must take their particular material nature into consideration—an idea Kittler’s followers like Wolfgang Ernst have adopted for their own work. It was probably in this sense that Michael Wetzel purported to combine Foucault and Kittler in his “preliminary considerations for an archaeology of the media,” published in 1989 in a collection of writings that already bore the words “archaeology of the media” in its title.
Although he has often been seen as part of a generation of German humanities scholars determined to steer media theory away from meaning and interpretation, Kittler did not neglect the powerrelated implications of technology. There is a “brand” of German media theory that emphasizes the “epistemic effects of media in the production and processing of knowledge” and “the medial dimensions of the mechanisms of power,” as the editor of a recent issue of Grey Room explained. To prevent the application of simple binary models to his work and his intellectual position, Kittler has denied any affiliation with the notion of media archaeology. His more recent work has returned to a more Heideggerian-inspired excavation of the history of Western culture through music and mathematics. Anglo-American media archaeologists—whether identifying themselves as such or not—have received impulses from the new historicism that emerged in the 1980s. Although it appeared first within literary scholarship, it soon spread to other areas, including history, where it inspired a movement known as the new cultural history. Among other sources, the new historicism was also influenced by Foucault, although his ideas were by no means approved without debate. H. Aram Veeser aptly summarized its “key assumptions” by stating “1) that every expressive act is embedded in a network of material practices; 2) that every act of unmasking, critique, and opposition uses the tools it condemns and risks falling prey to the practices it exposes; 3) that literary and non-literary ‘texts’ circulate inseparably; 4) that no discourse, imaginative or archival, gives access to unchanging truths or expresses inalterable human nature; 5) finally . . . that a critical method and a language adequate to describe culture under capitalism participate in the economy they describe.”  Applied to historical scholarship, the new historicism promoted a self- reflexive and discourse-oriented approach that frequently drew on neighboring disciplines, including the symbolic anthropology of Clifford Geertz, and the rather amorphous field of cultural studies.44 A kind of double focus developed: on the one hand, historians were supposed to immerse themselves in the past, observing it as if by the eyes of the contemporaries; on the other hand, they were supposed to be constantly aware of their observation post in the present, with all the ideological implications it entailed. The research process shifted constantly between the facts of the past, in the process of forming themselves into meaningful constellations, and the subjectivity of the observer. The historical explanation was formulated on/as a dynamic field with multiple determinants that were dynamic rather than static.
Siegfried Zielinski’s version of media archaeology is a practice of resistance, not only against what he perceives as the increasing uniformity of mainstream media culture, but also against media archaeology itself, or rather its assimilation and hardening into the normalcy of contemporary media studies. Considering media archaeology a “method” pinned down into an academic textbook would no doubt be a horror for Zielinski, who also calls his “activity” (Tätigkeit) by other names, such as “anarchaeology” and “variantology,” expressing an uneasiness toward permanent categories and doctrines. For him, media archaeology “in a pragmatic perspective means to dig out secret paths in history, which might help us to find our way into a future.”  This formulation reveals the utopian and Romantic underpinnings of Zielinski’s thought, which is not without—productive?—contradictions. Zielinski’s early work was not yet identified as “media-archaeological.” Zur Geschichte des Videorecorders (On the History of the Video Recorder, 1986) was a dense and detailed exploration of the topic, covering technological, institutional, and economical as well as sociocultural issues. It also contained a special section, “Aspects of the Video Recorder in Pictures,” a kind of visual essay that already pointed toward media-archaeological interests. His next major book, originally published in 1989 and translated as Audiovisions: Cinema and Television as Entr’actes in History, defined itself as an “outline of a history of audiovision” (Entwurf zu Geschichte der Audiovision), or a contribution toward to “an integrated history of the media” (integrierte Mediengeschichte). Drawing on an enormous mass of highly heterogeneous source material, the book demonstrated how distinctions between different audiovisual media were gradually erased during the twentieth century.
Although the theoretical construct behind Audiovisions was more implicit than explicit (as Zielinski himself admitted), he singled out the triad “technology-culture-subject,” identifying each of its elements with a recent intellectual tradition that had influenced him: the British cultural studies represented by Raymond Williams; the German historiography of technology that used a specific systems approach (Günter Ropohl); and the metapsychological cinema theories of Jean-Louis Baudry, Jean-Louis Comolli, and Christian Metz, which emphasized the notion of the cinematic apparatus. Zielinski stated that he did not want to “compete with other models that emphasise more strongly the techno-structure of media processes (like, for example, those of Friedrich Kittler and his pupils),” seeing his own as “supplementary.”  Zielinski’s road from Audiovisions to media archaeology seems logical. His project had taken him to “the end of the history of cinema and television,” where he saw only uniformity and unlimited industrial exploitation, surprisingly much in line with Adorno’s and Horkheimer’s position. “New media” did not provide relief, as their possibilities were mostly used to remediate and perpetuate hegemonic forms. Zielinski began turning toward two seemingly opposite directions that in the end pointed to the same goal, offering to break the psychopathia medialis of modern media culture. On the one hand were radical contemporary artists, who had potential to break the vicious goals of the culture industry; on the other were the hidden treasures of the past that might provide keys for a cultural renewal. Zielinski’s position was influenced by his role as the founding director and later rector of the Academy of Arts and the Media in Cologne, which gave him an opportunity to build connections between media studies and experimental media practices. Zielinski’s next book, translated as Deep Time of the Media: Toward an Archaeology of Hearing and Seeing by Technical Means (originally published in 2002), plunged into the “deep time” of media, offering a series of studies that were dedicated to the work of personalities who had rarely been associated with media culture before and were written in “a spirit of praise and commendation, not of critique.”  Empedocles, Athanasius Kircher, Cesare Lombroso, and others provided examples of genial individuals who worked out of love and inspiration against the odds of the real world. In Zielinski’s mind at least, they shared a kinship with another set of cultural heroes, contemporary artists working with media, such as Valie Export, David Larcher, Nam June Paik, Steina and Woody Vasulka, and Peter Weibel. Ideologically Zielinski almost seems to nod toward Thomas Carlyle’s Romantic classic On Heroes and Hero Worship and the Heroic in History (1841). He plunges headlong, and with pathos, into the world of his heroes, eschewing critical, skeptical, and theoretically oriented perspectives.
The “new film history” can arguably be seen as a parallel enterprise to media archaeology; both have their origins in the 1980s and are continuing to evolve. Although the profile of the former is far from clear, many of its practitioners sought new insights into the specific nature of cinema by introducing extended cultural, social, and economic contextualization, based on the consultation of varied firsthand source material, and by emphasizing cinema’s intermedial relationships. In a way Zielinski’s Audiovisions also pointed in this direction, but it went beyond the horizon of most film historians by focusing on the interplay between technology, cultural forms, and viewing subjects and by paying little attention to the content of films or television programs; the context and the technological apparatus were given center stage. The need for contextualization and intermediality was expressed well by Thomas Elsaesser in an article entitled “The New Film History as Media Archaeology”: Sound, for instance, since the silent cinema was rarely if ever silent, in which case: why is the history of the phonograph not listed as another tributary? And as we now understand the cinema as part of a multimedia environment, how about the telephone as an indispensable technology? Radio-waves? Electro-magnetic fields? The history of aviation? Do we not need Babbage’s difference engine ranged parallel to his friend Henry Fox-Talbot’s Calotypes or Louis Daguerre’s sensitised copper plates? These questions in themselves show how much our idea—and maybe even our definition—of cinema has changed even without appealing to digitization as a technology, which is nonetheless implicit as a powerful “perspective correction” and thus counts as an impulse in this retrospective re-writing of the past.
Gunning has also published many studies linking early cinema to other media, technological phenomena like ghost photography and X-rays, and institutions of emerging modernity, such as the World’s Fairs. Similarly, in Window Shopping (1993) Anne Friedberg traced the origins of cinema to forms and institutions of the emergent popular and consumer culture of the nineteenth century, creating an approach that clearly raised media-archaeological concerns. In The Virtual Window (2006) she pushed her analysis back by hundreds of years, further estranging it from the cinema studies paradigm. For Elsaesser, one of the challenges is the reevaluation of the connections and gaps between media technologies. The onslaught of digitalization is forcing cinema to rethink both its cultural position and its history. Considering digitality as a rupture provides a conceptual way of seeing media history as a discontinuous enterprise subject to constant reevaluation. Lev Manovich’s The Language of New Media (2001) was a historically tuned version of new media theory that built on cinema studies and film theory. It purported to place the new media “within the history of modern visual and media cultures.”  Manovich pointed out continuities between early avant-garde and animation film practices and the emerging digital culture, based on numerical representation, modularity, automation, variability, and transcoding. Beside film history and theory, he drew on the traditions of the Bildwissenschaft, including the work of Ervin Panofsky. The focus on new media changes the historical meaning and context of cinema from narrative cinema to one flexible enough to lend itself to interactivity, navigability, and digital representation and transmission. Media-historical and theoretical works with a background in film studies pose a challenge for the continued renewal of media archaeology. How does one avoid reducing all other media to a footnote to the history of the moving image? One alternative is the recent influx of archaeologically oriented works concentrating on the audible dimension of culture and history.
4 Emphasizing such heterogeneity is an attempt not so much to deliberately diversify the existing body of mediaarchaeological theory and praxis as to encourage “traveling” between discourses and disciplines. Still, amid all the variety, there is a need to define approaches and perhaps even to crystallize them into “methods,” at least in a local and tactical sense. Erkki Huhtamo’s variant of media archaeology is one such attempt, stemming from an effort to apply the idea of topos, as developed by the German literary scholar Ernst Robert Curtius in his classic Europäische Literatur und lateinisches Mittelalter (1948), to the field of media culture. The topos approach eschews “the new,” which is so often the focus of media-cultural discourses, both critical and popular; instead, it emphasizes the clichéd, the commonplace, and “the tired” (to appropriate jargon from WIRED magazine). Identifying ways in which media culture relies on the already known is just as essential as determining how it embodies and promotes the never before seen. In fact, these two aspects are connected with each other; the new is “dressed up” in formulas that may be hundreds of years old, while the old may provide “molds” for cultural innovations and reorientations. Huhtamo’s approach does not only identify topoi, trace their trajectories, and explore the circumstances of their reappearances. It also purports to demonstrate how topoi are constantly evoked by cultural agents, from spokespeople, sales agents, and politicians to writers, journalists, exhibition curators, and, last but not least, media artists, who use them for various kinds of purposes, from sales pitches and ideological persuasion to aesthetic reflections on media culture and history. This emphasis gives Huhtamo’s approach a culture-critical character. Although the cultural agents themselves may not always acknowledge it, the media-archaeological dimension is an essential element of the contemporary mind-set, constantly bombarded by media and communications. By demonstrating how the media’s past(s) lives on in the present, guiding and informing people’s attitudes in their daily lives, the topos approach helps to detect novelties, innovations, and media-cultural ruptures as well. As Huhtamo had already pointed out in 1996 in his essay “Time Machines in the Gallery: An Archeological Approach in Media Art,” a growing number of artists who are aware of media archaeology get inspiration from its findings and are contributing their own creations and discoveries. This has led to intriguing parallels and connections between research and artistic creativity.
“Media” are not only related to the established institutions of modernity. They are also manifested in the narratives of madmen, religious visions, theories about the psyche and the body, and other recurring issues associated with technological modernity. But the term imaginary media does not refer only to the human imagination as a site for fantastic modes of communication. It can also mean extensions of the notion of “media” in theories of the mind and the brain. Media are in this sense a reservoir for tactics and techniques for manipulating humans and their culture. The chapters in this section demonstrate that media archaeology not only is grounded in Foucault’s methodology but can also find inspiration from psychoanalysis and other early twentieth-century cultural theories, including the German Bildwissenschaften and the topos theory of literature. Erkki Huhtamo’s chapter offers a theoretical-historical contextualization of the topos, a notion he has adopted from the literary scholar Ernst Robert Curtius and has turned into a “tool” for explaining the recurrence of clichés and commonplaces in media culture. Huhtamo has applied the idea to various media forms ranging from “peep media” and the moving panorama to mobile media. In this chapter he delineates his approach theoretically, discussing its predecessors and demonstrating how it can be applied to various facets of media culture. For Huhtamo, the task is “identifying topoi, analyzing their trajectories and transformations, and explaining the cultural ‘logics’ that condition their ‘wanderings’ across time and space.” Topoi are discursive “engines” that mediate themes, forms, and fantasies across cultural traditions. Predictably, they have become a tool in the hands of the culture industry.
Setting out from a Foucauldean position, he mobilizes Siegfried Zielinski’s notions of “variantology,” and “anarchaeology of media.” Through a series of examples, Kluitenberg demonstrates how the notion of imaginary media can be conceived and used to contextualize and enhance contemporary media production. Relying on Zielinski, he claims that excavating the media cultures of the past is important not only in itself but also for the creation of innovative and critical futures. This is one of the key features of many media-archaeological writings: archival findings and reconstructions of the narratives of the past are tied with emerging media practices. Both Jeffrey Sconce’s and Thomas Elsaesser’s chapters submit psychoanalytic themes to a media-archaeological elaboration. Theories of the psyche and the mind become excavation sites that both Sconce and Elsaesser explore to uncover new ways of understanding modern media culture. Sconce focuses on “the influencing machine” as it was conceptualized by the psychoanalyst Victor Tausk in the 1930s. Rather than considering it as a schizophrenic delusion, Sconce sees it as a projection of broadcast media, implicitly associated with mind control. The “delusions” he discusses are not related to any specific technology; rather, they testify to “a vernacular theory of power forged at the end of the nineteenth century.” In his chapter Elsaesser analyzes Sigmund Freud’s writings, providing insights to the media archaeological conceptualization of memory. He shows that Freud’s analyses of the psyche can be taken as media theories in their own right—as ways of understanding not only perception, but issues like storage and processing as well. The psyche itself is a kind of a media machine. Elsaesser's media archaeological reading of Freud’s classic text “Notes on the Mystic Writing Pad” opens an alternative path to understanding early psychoanalytic theories in the context of the emerging media culture. It shows that Freud can also be applied to a media archaeology of images in the era of digital data. Elsaesser argues that “considering Freud as theorist of auxiliary memory and the technical media, and thus as a media theorist, shifts this perspective away from film to a more general consideration of the technical media".
Some time ago, while I was leafing through an airline magazine, an ad caught my attention. It was associated with a current event—the Winter Olympics in Turin—and promoted Samsung mobile phones.1 The setting was a deserted, dimly lit office after hours. Unusual mini-Olympics were taking place on a desk in the foreground. Between a frozen laptop computer and a frost-covered coffee cup, Lilliputian sportspeople—a figure skater, skiers, ice hockey and curling players—were in full action. The center of everything was a snow-covered mountain capped by a Samsung phone. The mountain continued into the virtual realm of its screen, where a takeoff ramp built on its slope could be seen; a jumper was midair, shooting down from the ramp—and out from the screen. It immediately occurred to me that I had encountered such tiny people before. Examples abound: in a cartoon published in the New Yorker in 1959 a cleaning lady is seen mopping the floor after hours next to a huge mainframe computer.2 She turns her head and sees a tiny man leaving through a doorway on the side of the enormous computer, clutching his suitcase and raising his hat in a mechanical greeting. I also came to think about Little Computer People, a computer game for the Commodore 64 (1987). In its promotional campaign, Activision pretended they had found little people living inside computers. The idea of the product was to persuade one of them to live in a “House-on-a-Cassette,” a software application where the person’s routines could be observed and interacted with.
Going back even further, we discover that little people had already appeared in the context of phonograph and gramophone advertising. Elsewhere, we discover them in early trick films and in the delightfully impish video installations by the French media artist Pierrick Sorin. We could also fly back through the tunnel of time to the realms of fairies, gnomes, and Lilliputians. “The little people” is a topos—a stereotypical formula evoked over and over again in different guises and for varying purposes. Such topoi accompany and influence the development of media culture. Cultural desires are expressed by being embedded them within topoi. Functioning as shells or vessels derived from the memory banks of tradition, topoi mold the meaning(s) of cultural objects. High technology can be represented as something else through application of the “fairy engines” of topos traditions. They can disguise culture as nature, and something unheard-of as something familiar. As Peter Burke has written, “The facade of tradition may mask innovation.” As discursive meaning processors, topoi not only express beliefs but can serve rhetorical and persuasive goals, as evidenced in the field of advertising. New products are promoted by being packaged into formulas that are meant to strike the observer as novel, although they have been put together from ingredients retrieved from cultural archives. Burke’s dictum can therefore also be reversed: the facade of innovation may mask tradition, and apparent ruptures disguise hidden continuities. Identifying topoi, analyzing their trajectories and transformations, and explaining the cultural logics that condition their “wanderings” across time and space is one possible goal for media archaeology. In this chapter I will lay a theoretical and historiographical foundation for this type of approach. I have already applied it in a more strategic sense in a number of studies. Media archaeology means for me a critical practice that excavates media-cultural evidence for clues about neglected, misrepresented, and/or suppressed aspects of both media’s past(s) and their present and tries to bring these into a conversation with each other. It purports to unearth traces of lost media-cultural phenomena and agendas and to illuminate ideological mechanisms behind them. It also emphasizes the multiplicity of historical narratives and highlights their constructed and ideologically determined nature. I will begin by discussing the origins of Toposforschung in the work of Ernst Robert Curtius and assessing some of its influences, including C. G. Jung’s theory of archetypes and Aby Warburg’s iconological approach to the study of visual culture. I will then discuss the relevance of Curtius’s ideas for the study of media culture and will propose modifications in the light of more recent applications of the notion of the topos. I will proceed to exemplify roles the topoi serve within media culture and, finally, will discuss the potential advantages and problems of the approach delineated in this chapter.
Although he claimed he was practicing “philological microscopy,” Curtius’s approach was expansive. He compared it to aerial photography, which had helped archaeology to discover massive land structures invisible from the ground level; after the discovery, the photograph had to be enlarged and the details investigated. Curtius condensed his approach into a maxim: “Specialization without universalism is blind. Universalism without specialization is inane.”  Universalism as he understood it applied only to literary traditions, which he treated as an independent realm. Although he described in meticulous detail how specific topoi had been handed down from writer to writer, he did not perceive essential changes in their meanings—only changes in their style. In spite of making occasional context-driven statements such as “In messianically and apocalyptically excited periods, faded symbolic figures can be filled with new life, like shades which have drunk blood,” Curtius did not really explain topoi by relating them to factors that could be considered external to the literary tradition. Had he attempted to analyze topoi as symptomatic of the times and places in which they were evoked, Curtius might have come to the conclusion that their appearances marked not only continuities but cultural ruptures and discontinuities as well. This has been emphasized by later topos scholars. For Ernst Ulrich Grosse, differences in the ways a certain topos has been used are more interesting than similarities because they have potential to reveal changes and historical turning points. For him, the appearance of a topos is potentially conditioned by several factors: the immediate environment as well as the will of the author; the evolution of literary genres as well as the history of mentalities. When a topos emerges, it should be treated as a node in a complex network of references and determinants. Topos study is steeped in the issue of cultural contextualization, no matter how difficult and elusive it may be.
Such “dressing up in technology” is another topos that manifested itself both as imaginary projections and in the new realities of working life. Women working as telephone switchboard operators were “dressed up” in their headphones all day long and, indeed, could be argued to have became cyborgs of sorts as well. An intriguing manifestation of such developments is the famous artwork Electric Dress created by the radical Japanese Gutai artist Atsuko Tanaka for her performances in the 1950s. Whether Tanaka was aware of the topos tradition anticipating her work is uncertain but unlikely. One could also refer to public demonstrations of smart fabrics and cyberfashion in recent years. Yet another nineteenth-century example is a topos that could be labeled “What is happening behind your back?”  In its most typical manifestation a man (often an officer) is represented kissing a girl left unguarded when her mother is peeping into a peep-show box. This topos jumped from device to device (peep show, magic lantern, telescope, kaleidoscope, Daguerreotype camera, etc.), justifying Peter Burke’s call to “focus on the displacement or migration of a given schema or stereotype from one object to another.”  By midcentury the man stealing the kiss had been transformed from a reckless officer seeking amorous encounters into a door-to-door salesman marketing stereoscopic photographs, acting when the unsuspecting husband is peering at his sample cards. In another variant of the same topos, already known around 1800, the man peeping into a peep-show box falls prey to a pickpocket, who is actually represented as a tax official stealing money from the people to fund the government’s war efforts; media like broadcast television are still used much the same way, not only by governments but also by groups like televangelists. The same topos reappeared in the context of another peeping device, the mutoscope, a hundred years later, but here the political has been replaced by the homoerotic. In a French cartoon (1910) a male peeping into the mutoscope experiences the pickpocket’s touches as erotic; the positions of the male bodies suggest anal intercourse. Exactly the same variant reappeared in a series of video installations by Pierrick Sorin. The similarities make one wonder whether Sorin actually knew the topos or whether he grasped the idea spontaneously. Topoi that have been inspired by media spectacles may remain just stereotypical metaphors, but their recurrence may also point to wider concerns and cultural patterns. Although the topos “What is happening behind your back?” usually appears in comic episodes and may be dismissed just as a joke, it could also be read as a repeated warning about the risks of excessive media use. Too much immersion may upset one’s social relations and disturb one’s relationship to one’s immediate physical surroundings, it seems to say. It functions, then, as a kind of discursive buffer softening the shocks caused by encounters with new media and the mediated environment.
The phantasmagoria, the kaleidoscope, dissolving views, the diorama, the moving panorama, and many other media-cultural phenomena have given rise to topoi. Indeed, Curtius himself resorted to them when he wrote, “Not until late Antiquity is color in demand again—and then it is the color of a kaleidoscope.”  And again: “New and ever new figures rise kaleidoscopically—rhetorical bravura pieces whose exuberance pours out like a cascade.”  Many “mediacultural” topoi keep on appearing long after the thing they originally designated has materially disappeared. Moving panorama originally referred to a popular nineteenth-century spectacle. As a topos, it came to manifest perceptual experiences, inner visions (“life passing before the mind’s eye like a moving panorama at the moment of death”), religious revelations (God revealing his plans as a moving panorama in the sky), celestial mechanics, and many other purposes. In Elvis’ Search for God (1998), Jess Stearns still described how Elvis “felt a surge of emotion, as the moving panorama of the gilded years floated by for a moment.”  Although, as Curtius said, “the topos can be employed in any context,” its manifestations are affected by the specific nature of that context. Media-related ideas may also traverse culture as “imaginary media” long before they materialize as artifacts. “Seeing at a distance” is such a topos. We encounter it already in discourses about magic mirrors, and in an intensified form in technocultural fantasies about the telectroscope, an imaginary anticipation of the television. One the other hand, as Geoffrey Batchen has demonstrated, the desire to photograph seems to have emerged rather suddenly in the late eighteenth century, preceded by very few immediate fantasies. However, once photography made its breakthrough, the discursive floodgates opened and the desire to photograph was translated into an intense topos activity.
The use of topoi in promotional strategies exploits their attraction value but also their “nonattraction” value. Topoi are used to arrest the eye in accordance with the long traditions of the culture of attractions. They provide a striking sight or textual formula that intrigues the observer. In commercial media culture their character is instrumental: they have been recruited to provide a product or spectacle with a certain historical or cultural surplus value acknowledged by the observer. Obviously the topos can have an effect by its invisibility, by its unremarkable and commonplace character. In such cases it is used to provide a mold for content that pretends to be something unprecedented, cut off from the past. In either case topoi provide advertisers with tried-and-tested formulas that are used to introduce new consumer products by embedding them within molds the customers already know (whether they are aware of it or not). There seems to be a paradox here: the newest of the new is packaged in the oldest of the old. The most obvious example that comes to mind is from the marketing strategies of screen technology. No matter how “revolutionary” the product may be, advertisements show us, over and over again, humans or objects breaking through the screen, in either direction. The manifest features of such ads are of course constantly updated in accordance with fashions and stylistic trends, but underneath we detect an ancient topos associated with the history of illusionistic representation. Figures have been stepping in and out of paintings for millennia; they are still performing stunts on today’s flat-panel plasma screens. The recurrence of the “traversing the screen” topos may be motivated by the need to fight consumer resistance toward the new, although in a postmodern culture that readily embraces high technology it may have more to do with appealing to consumers’ love of pastiche, nostalgia, and cultural sound bites. Such issues also occupy industrial design, preoccupied with finding the right ratio between futuristic and retro styles (retro-futuristic is one option). Early TV sets were often enclosed in wooden cabinets that made them look like a traditional piece of furniture, while Jonathan Ive’s original iMac (1999) displayed its “inner organs” through its acrylic plastic case. Apple’s advertisements tried to make most out of it, displaying the computer from the side rather than from the front, as had nearly always been the case. The campaign broke with the “breaking through the screen” tradition, but it may well have reactivated the topos of the little people, at least in some consumers’ minds: the inside of the iMac was made to look like a miniature world that could well have been inhabited by little computer people. The case of the little people demonstrates that cultural subjects do not consume representations provided by the industry as such. Users developed and disseminated their own beliefs and even tested them in action, pushing food through holes inside TV sets, stalking behind their sets to see the little people leave their workplace, or even attempting to break the screen physically to free them.
