Greetings once again dear ones, in this time of new beginnings.  We come to bring encouragement and love to the many of you who are experiencing seeming discord both within and without.  Old ideas are quickly becoming obsolete and dissolving, but the new ones are not yet fully able to manifest (personally and universally) leaving you confused.

It may appear as if the world is functioning as usual, and yet you are finding that much of it no longer resonates with you in the ways you have come to know and expect.  This is the confusion and causes you to question yourselves.  Never doubt or  believe that you are simply making  things up, are over tired, or just plain going crazy  as change begin to take place within your awareness. Change  signifies  a  consciousness that is expanding--often away from what is familiar or known.

You are not consciously aware of how much is happening on other levels as you sleep, meditate, or simply go about your day.  Human beings are programmed to analyze and mentally figure everything out, but this approach does not work with what is now taking place on  deeper levels.

The sense of separation with which mankind  has lived lifetime after lifetime,  has manifested a world of much unnecessary suffering for many.   The few who recognized the error of this concept have  always been harshly silenced by the un-awakened majority, and so the myth lived on. Thus sincere seekers  became used to looking outside of themselves to those deemed more knowledgeable and trained in truth, but more often than not were and still are told that man is tarnished and must work his way back into the good graces of a God made in man's image and likeness through suffering and great effort.

False teachings have never affected truth, but through lifetimes did affect your acceptance of truth.   All experiences (many not so pleasant) resulting from this ignorance are important facets of your evolutionary journey and have brought you to where you are now.  There is no need for fear or doubt dear ones, for you are on your way whether you think you are or not.  Leave behind those teachings that tell you that you must believe a certain way, or undergo specific ceremonies in order to be "saved" or spiritual.  It is time to understand that you are already  saved and spiritual and at no time ever, have you not been.

This is the sacred secret long hidden within each where it was never suspected of being--you have always been an expression of Source.  Your Real Self has never nor could it ever, be separate from the One Omnipresent Divine Consciousness for that is all there is.  Where would you come from?

Evolution is simply the gradual process of remembering through lifetimes of stepping and falling, stepping and falling.  Earth is a powerful and difficult school, but you will graduate very prepared as powerful beings of Light.  All is proceeding according to plan and you are now ready to move beyond the stepping and falling part and come into the knowing.

Spiritual readiness is always known and directed by the Higher Self, and you are being guided to and through each necessary step of your journey.  This knowledge will serve to remove from you the burdens of trying to figure everything out mentally and continuously seek.  Many metaphysical books written in the past, laid out definite practices necessary for spiritual growth.  If you are drawn to certain practices, that is fine for many of them were actually based in truth,  but if you are not drawn to them or if they feel "old" to you,  then trust this and never think you have failed in some way because of it.

Most of you have evolved beyond needing a lot of outer tools.  Many (not all) of the older books were written for beginners who needed specific practices in order to awaken to new levels of understanding, there are still many who equate being psychic with being spiritual.

Mankind's shift  into higher levels of awareness is manifesting outwardly as many new and very evolved teachers.  You will recognize them by the energy of their words.  Be open, for they may present  ideas of truth that at first seem strange.  Many very evolved beings of Light are now  incarnating or  choosing to be "walk ins" in order to help the many who are ready  move deeper and higher, beyond what up to now has been known and taught.

There is no need to figure everything out, just know that you are being guided.  The "monkey mind" loves to dictate the spiritual journey with suggestions, ideas, and judgement, but remember the human mind can only access what is already out there in world consciousness unless given more from deeper levels.  You have moved beyond the mental stage--love it, thank it for its suggestions, and  pay it no attention, instead choosing to listen and be guided from within.

Any unpleasant experiences you may be going through right now are simply old energies (concepts, beliefs, experiences) coming  forth to be noticed, interpreted on a higher level, and released.  These experiences are signs that you are ready for the deeper truths that cannot integrate with the old still in place.

Karmic situations needing completion, are coming to a head for many.  Diseases, irrational fears, and all sorts of issues considered to be problems in the third dimension, are presenting themselves to many very evolved souls now spiritually able and ready to release them.  Problems are never a sign of failure for a serious seeker of truth.  When things seem to fall apart, recognize the experience as an indication of your readiness to look deeper and that you are now evolved enough to do the work.  Never see yourselves or others as a failure based on outer appearances, for you may well be witnessing a very evolved soul who has  chosen to work out profound levels of old energy in this lifetime.

There are some tempted to deny "problems" when they appear, believing that this is the more spiritual  way  (problems are not God ordained and therefore do not exist).  This often becomes a trap for the serious student because in reality this is the absolute truth, but the absolute cannot be lived and experienced fully  until one has attained that state of consciousness. Know the truth of the absolute, but live out from your highest attained state of consciousness.

Denial and resistance can solidify problems, for denial and resistance feeds them with energy. Never deny the discords in your life but know that they have no real power other than the power you give them.  We do not say that if you have concern over some health issue you must not visit  a doctor or that this indicates a backward step, for  loving and dedicated help manifests and is available on all levels.

You are moving into a new paradigm of living, emerging into an awareness of yourselves as powerful beings--butterflies emerging from lifetimes spent in heavy cocoons of duality and separation.  The cocoon must be discarded  no matter how familiar or comfortable it may of become  reflecting change with what you eat, the way you play, your work, and all things in life.  You are experiencing a shift into the higher sense of ordinary things which does not mean you must leave behind everything that is important to you, but means you must be willing for some things to assume a new place, evolving into something new or perhaps being left behind.

This  way of being becomes automatic as you begin to live attuned always to the within.   Do you wish to stay in what is known and familiar no matter how uncomfortable, or do you wish to move on to something new?  Be not afraid dear ones, for the spiritually new will always manifest in higher and better forms.  You are not leaving anything real, you coming to understand  and experience these same things on higher levels.

Welcome to spring dear ones, how quickly this year seems to be moving along.  Time as you have always known it is now different because as your energy is lifting and evolving so are all the qualities of the third dimension lifting and evolving.  Time is simply a measure necessary while living in the third dimension.

We wish to discuss the  energy of conflict.  Conflict is the manifestation of duality/separation consciousness .  Everyone seeks the experience of completeness and wholeness as well as to be loved because it is the only reality, the real you, the essence of every living thing.   However, those who do not understand this yearning, interpret it in ways that make sense according to their three dimensional belief system.  "If I act a certain way, dress a certain way. look a certain way, make a lot of money, then I will be loved and loveable. "

Many seek  it through multiple sexual partners, confusing love with sex. When this  brings no real satisfaction, they move on to the next, and the next, always seeking that sense of wholeness and completeness that can be found only within.

There are some who seek  love and acceptance through violence-- "If I eliminate these people who disagree with the truth as I understand it,  then there will be  peace and everything will be perfect.  I will be a hero".

Belief systems based in rigid rules of right and wrong, and implemented by ego driven and un-awakened "leaders" (as well as followers),  have over thousands of years  always resulted in the  pain, suffering, and even death to those who disagreed with them.  What is taking place in the Middle East is not new, it is very, very old and does not belong to one religion alone.

NO belief system on earth is the "one and  only true teaching".  All teachings are simply interpretations of truth.  Truth only flows from within when an individual is spiritually ready to receive it.  Many evolved teachers throughout the ages have received pure Truth,  but have been unable to pass it on to very many because those of less evolved consciousness were unable to fully comprehend what was being taught.  Because of this,  they formed concepts of what was being taught, fitting truth into their personal belief system, and then organizing it.   Truth can never be organized or it is lost among those not ready.

There is an old saying;  "If you can name it, or see it, that is not IT" for Divine Consciousness can never be comprehended by the mind.  This is the purpose of meditation, to move the seeker beyond the plotting, planning, busy, human mind.  The one and only truth is; "I AM", words for which the master Jeshua was put to death by an un-awakened society unable to comprehend the true meaning of these sacred words.

In reality there is no right and wrong, just each soul's struggle to awaken through the experiences of the third dimension.  We do not say there is no need for jails for there are some who need  time away from society to think about their actions and who are unable learn through the  higher ways.  We do say punishment should never devolve into ego driven physical, emotional, or mental cruelty by those who believe that by virtue of their "rightness" the others deserve anything they do to them.

Much of what you see in the Middle East represents the manifestation of very ancient energies now surfacing and being exposed.   Violence never solves anything nor can it ever result in true peace, for violence is a self perpetuating energy, a lesson most governments have yet to learn.

Try not to dwell on the issues of violence you are aware of, for that simply feeds  energy to them.  Your work, because you have chosen to evolve and move into unconditional love,  is to live it.  Live love in every seemingly insignificant  moment of your day.  Love is the activity of a consciousness of oneness and it matters not how small or large the activity--petting a dog, opening a door, giving a smile or encouraging word while centered in the heart.  These seemingly small things are the living of love and as you learn to live this way, you will draw to yourself more and bigger ways of expressing love.  It all starts with one step--the life of spiritual awareness will not drop in your lap without effort and practice.

Society, throughout time has heaped praise and even deification on the "greats" of the human world--artists, actors, musicians, warriors, scientists, writers, religious and world leaders, etc.  This  is fine, but accomplishments  interpreted only from the third dimensional stand point do not add more light to the world and often simply feed egos.

That said, many of the world's "greats" were and are, very evolved souls, some from other higher dimensional  star systems, who have chosen to incarnate on earth in order to help lift the consciousness of mankind at this powerful time through their work.

You are the ones who will change the world dear ones.  Every bit of light you flow adds to the universal world consciousness and at some point the balance is going to tip.  The light of awareness is growing by leaps and bounds now as many awaken to their and everyone else's true nature. What one does to another, one does to self for there is only One.  This realization by a majority is what will end conflict in the world.

It may appear as if the world  is growing worse instead of waking up, but this is because issues that were heretofore unknown by most, are now being exposed.  Things kept hidden  by those standing to profit by or enjoy them, are now surfacing which is why it is so important at this time to use your intuition regarding everything presented to you by the news media.

There are those who do not wish you to know about certain things and so try to negate reports or demonize individuals behind the exposures.   You have evolved well beyond blindly accepting everything you may read or hear at this point, but it is very easy to slip back without question.  This goes for channelings as well, so learn to listen to and trust your intuition for not everything you read is on the highest level.

Exposures are helping to change and clear blind acceptance by those still enmeshed in the third dimensional belief system.  There are many who still believe everything they are told by anyone holding a position of authority be it in the realm of medical, religious, "expert",  or government.  Give gratitude when something  is exposed instead of going into  negative thoughts about the issue itself.

Everything taking place on earth at this time is a part of the ascension process and your part is to live out from your highest attained consciousness of truth.  Be good world citizens--vote and  be informed but do it with the guidance of your intuition, allowing yourself be guided to the candidate that most reflects the highest Light while ignoring  rhetoric so carefully scripted to tell people  what they want to hear.

You are on earth to participate in the ascension process of mankind and Gaia, not to rest back in a meditative state chanting Omn.   In the past, an individual  could only safely pursue the spiritual life through entering a convent or monastery and even now this is appropriate for some but most of you came into this incarnation to be an active part of this process.

Life is not a passive event.  Living spiritually  is the activity of living out from center in every situation regardless of what others may believe.  Living your attained state of consciousness is all that is required. Truth can no longer simply be dinner party conversation or interesting concepts put to the back of the mind while continuing to live life as usual.

Living actively does not mean you must shout truth as you know it from the roof tops, or try to convince everyone in your circle to see the world as you do, it means you begin to LIVE IT and BE IT and that may be a very secret and silent activity.  Your light will draw to you those ready to hear what you have to  say but in the mean time  you sweep the floor, go to work, cook dinner, mow the lawn--continuing to do everyday things but from a higher level of awareness.

If your work is to be in the world as a truth teacher, you will be guided when the time is right. Often you will feel the urge for something new  but the energy is not yet in place for it to manifest, so do not get discouraged.   Most are finding that what they are already doing is expanding  and growing into new and higher ways. This is especially true for some healers of all modalities who are finding their practices unfolding into areas and solutions they never knew existed.

When a soul opens to being taught from within, many higher and better ways can be downloaded by evolved beings from the other side.  This is true for music, medicine, art, anything... When these things come only from the human mind, they are never  new or creative.  There are some great composers who simply listened and wrote.

Try not to pursue some concept of what being "spiritual" means for this simply represents an idea you may be holding about what spirituality is and what it isn't.  Never forget that every action and every breath you take is a Divine activity.  The three dimensional world in its quest for and defining of what determines greatness (in reality the search for completeness and wholeness),  has caused many dear souls to lose heart,  believing they were unworthy and hopeless.

Never forget  that once you commit to the spiritual journey, you are on your way.  You may be guided to a book or a class as new directions unfold for you,  but in general most you are now beyond "needing" them other than for the pleasure of spiritual reading or as reminders.

You are ready to be taught from within, trust this.   It is why you came.

Dear ones,  Greetings to all in  this season of Christian celebration.  Know that the death and resurrection remembered at Easter were meant to provide profound spiritual teachings for all,  Christian as well as non-Christian.

Spring is bringing with it new beginnings, even for those who may be trying very hard to avoid new beginnings.  We speak now of those who believe that their learning curve is finished  and that they are now entitled to sit back and enjoy "old age".  Those in this category will be very surprised when change begins to disrupt this cherished illusion.  Everyone must be prepared for change both within and without regardless of human age and its manifestations .

Refuse to blindly accept into consciousness the beliefs and fears about aging being incessantly thrown at you by corporations who stand to profit from your fears of age and deterioration.    Individual  human age matters not in the spiritual journey for in reality, everyone is as old as God.

We emphasize change simply to remind all now on earth  to not get too comfortable in the illusion, for you all made the choice to be a part of this powerful time of change in order to spiritually evolve and then in turn, assist others.

An energy field filled with Light can lift those receptive and ready  without words ever being spoken and often even without any conscious awareness. This is what happened in the story of the woman touching the hem of Jesus's robe and being healed.  It was not the robe, it was the very illuminated energy field of Jesus.  She was receptive and was thus lifted into his higher frequency consciousness where disease did not exist.

Many of you are beginning to experience others seeking you out--asking what you know, how you may feel about this or that,  or what you believe--your advice.  They do not know  exactly what it is they seek, but they feel your Light.  When this happens, remember always to keep yourselves in compassion and not sympathy, for in sympathy you align with the other's energy.

Every soul seeks Light for it is the focus of the true Self to be remembered, but as with all things, this too is interpreted according to the individual state of consciousness.  Even those seeming to live out from the densest of third dimensional energy are unknowingly seeking the peace and harmony of Light  when their discordant actions may indicate otherwise. A murderer believes he is making things better for himself in some way.

The Arcturian Group wishes to speak of Resurrection--a term  heavily imbued with the Christian teachings of Jesus being crucified and then arising from the dead and leaving the tomb.  The hidden, deeper message is that only through the death of the old, can come new beginnings.  It has been taught and believed by many that the resurrection story is about one person alone--Jesus.   It is time to understand that the birth, death, and resurrection events were all profound teachings given to the world with unconditional love by Jesus, not meant to be pinned on him alone.

Death and resurrections have been experienced by all with varying intensity throughout lifetimes.  You have all had them.  Death and resurrection has been ongoing, serving to lift the soul to new levels of spiritual awareness through physical, emotional, and mental experiences until at last there comes a final and profound death and resurrection in which the soul finally remembers Itself.

The idea of this experience as belonging to one  alone,  has resulted in mankind missing many of the vital and powerful lessons that were given through a great sacrifice by the illumined teacher.

All are in and of One Divine Consciousness.  Jesus, an evolved being and master of Light, incarnated to be the example, showing mankind that the Way is within, but the consciousness of most were not able to accept this and instead chose to make him into a God as many still do.   The same is true of Siddhartha who become the Buddha, and all the great spiritual Lights through out time.

Over and over again, un-awakened individuals have interpreted mystical teachings according to their less evolved state of consciousness.  Then in their enthusiasm, they proceed to organize their interpretations,  and deify the original messenger as being separate and more special than everyone else.  They worship the messenger, and thus miss the message entirely.

It is time to leave behind all the old concepts and beliefs and enter into your own power, dear ones.  It is time to accept and believe that you and all are the expressions of the Divine, even those over-shadowed by ignorance and  dense energy.  It is time to claim your Divine Sonship, your Oneness, and your Divinity.

Easter represents  a rising out from the tomb of false beliefs and concepts and is often  pre-ceded by whatever painful crucifixion experiences may be necessary in order to dissolve those firmly held concepts forming your personal world.

Resurrection is universal--it is the Phoenix rising from the ashes, it is the awakening of Siddhartha Gautama under the Bodhi tree, and is the master Jesus emerging alive with Divine Light from the tomb.

Just as the birth in a manger is symbolic of a new self being born from  humble circumstances, so is  Easter your story presented ever so lovingly by a great master of Light.  It is the story of you, arising out of centuries of living in duality and  separation and finally remembering.

Arise dear ones.  Celebrate, claim SELF, and live, for in Light there is no more crucifixion, only Resurrection.

Dear ones,  we greet you in this time of new beginnings--springtime.   Many of you are exhausted, having been  inundated with the issues of winter weather and sigh with relief as you see more of the warming sun which is bringing with it powerful new energies.  Be prepared to experience some shifting within as well as to observe it in the  general awareness of the world which will be accompanied by some weather related issues.

A new and powerful consciousness is being born and as with all births is accompanied by some pain and difficulty, much of which is dependent upon a willingness or non-willingness to embrace change. Many are discovering themselves no longer able to blindly accept the political nonsense with its accompanying rules and regulations.  The self serving and  adolescent behavior of many so called "leaders" is helping to open the eyes of many.  It is a time of  awakening and the accumulated blinders so many have lived with and taken for granted, are coming off.

We wish to speak of truth, and its energy in the world.  Concepts and beliefs about truth flow from  and manifest through individual  consciousness as well as being held in the impersonal universal consensus consciousness.  Certain ideas  held to be truth within the majority consciousness are more and more being rejected  in personal consciousness.  Every bit of Light you embrace then becomes a part of the general world consciousness and this  diluting and  enlightenment of world consciousness is what allows the uninterested and un-awakened masses to awaken.

Concepts and beliefs about truth  reflect the belief system (state of consciousness) of the individual and easily change.  TRUTH in its highest sense can never be be changed or limited and is infinitely governed and held in place by Divine law.  We speak of course of spiritual truth, the only truth there is, which reflects One omnipresent , omnipotent, omniscient  Consciousness and all that is embodied within it.  This is the absolute and the only reality.

It is time to examine everything you hold to be truth, dear ones for much that passes as truth is simply some concept handed down from generation to generation.  Most third dimensional ideas along with their particular rules and regulations, were learned at the feet of  parents, religious leaders, governments, scientists, and experts, who simply parrot what  they were taught.  Many teachings hold no real truth at all, but simply represent current third dimensional thinking unless the teacher is somewhat spiritually evolved and even then, whatever is presented can rise no higher than the teacher's attained state of consciousness.

This is why you must learn to be taught from within.  You are ready, and many of you are doing it, but question it and are confused because the world does not yet support this way of learning and living.

A good example of an intrenched concept that has passed from generation to generation and held as truth is prejudice--the belief that another is  inferior because of skin color, eye shape,  language,  etc.   Children are taught through the words, actions, and attitudes of adults that  particular traits make some inferior.

Many of these beliefs have been carried forward in cellular memory from  past lives and are now  presenting and will continue to present in various forms until released and cleared.  Some unable to move beyond intensely held beliefs  will make a pre-birth choice for some necessary experience  in order to spiritually grow, and so the pre-birth choice of a former slave owner may be to experience this lifetime as a black person.  Someone who killed and tortured Native Americans in a quest for land in the settling of the US may find himself now living as a Native American, experiencing all the accompanying prejudice.  The same is true for the gay community.

Not all  choices to be born into a group that is prejudiced against are based in Karma.  There are many evolved souls of great light who specifically choose situations in which they will experience prejudice in order to change the energy, to enlighten the world,  and help those of the particular "group" to understand, love, and honor themselves.  You know many of these Lightworkers as the leaders and healers within certain groups.

Karma is  NOT  PUNISHMENT  but is the balancing of energy required when an individual is unable to  move beyond some old outgrown state of consciousness  held fast lifetime after lifetime.  Karma often represents some past life action or interaction ready to be resolved and cleared .  Karmic experiences represent a way of resolution for the un-awakened who are unable or unwilling to clear in higher ways.  Many still need to learn this way,  but karmic experiences are no longer necessary once an individual opens to truth for he is then able to being taught and learn through higher and much easier ways.

If you discover prejudice or even  hatred toward certain groups or individuals surfacing within you, do not react and condemn yourselves, but rejoice for this means you are now evolved enough and ready to honestly examine and clear your belief system of this particular issue.  Ask yourself; "In the light of One, what am I believing?  Yes, I see discord and disharmony, but what is the truth?" This is how you identify any false beliefs you may still be unaware that you  hold about anything,  dear ones.

All serious students of truth are getting scrubbed clean at this powerful time, every seemingly small issue of the false is presenting itself to be examined and let go of--the spiritual  leash is getting very, very short and many of you find that are not having much fun.   Allow the process dear ones, for once cleared of all that is false, you will be able to move, live, and be  in the higher frequencies of unconditional love and Light--Truth.  Life will become what it was meant to be, and you will be free, never to fall back asleep.

Try  not to question and argue the issues you intuitively know need to be let go, but  simply accept that change is the process of evolution.  You cannot carry with you into the higher frequencies of Light the dense and un-illumined energies you have grown used to no matter how fun, comfortable, or lucrative they might be.  As always, there is free will choice  which allows every soul to live the dream as long as desired.

Truth is, always has been, and always will be.  Truth never changes, it is only un-illumined concepts of truth that change  which is what is happening to universal awareness at this time.  Begin to recognize the TRUTH behind "truth" and understand that your embracing and living out from  TRUTH is the only way to enlightenment at which point you can then turn around and assist others to move into their enlightenment--you become Light Workers.

The energy of TRUTH is LOVE and within that Love is oneness, peace, joy, wholeness, and abundance in infinite form and variety.  This is the reality. This is what you seek and this is what you are.
We come with greetings of love and grace to assist all who  seek change and deeper awareness.  We observe that many have already accomplished this; you have done the work and are beginning to see the fruitage of that work.

As Gaia lifts into ever higher dimensional levels, many are beginning to more easily experience and integrate the  deeper truths.  Concepts previously taken for granted as being truth, have become no longer acceptable to ever increasing numbers of people.  Some holding  positions of leadership or fame who comfortably spewed lies or acted in ways to enhance their own power, authority, wealth, and self aggrandizement, are being exposed.  This is happening because so many have begun to listen to and act upon their intuition  instead of simply accepting  "bought and paid for" sources of information.  You are awakening from the dream.

Always listen to your intuition dear ones.  Even if at first you are unable to fully trust, make a mental note of what you receive.   Intuitive guidance and knowledge comes from soul, it is you, and will  guide you through every situation of every day if you acknowledge and allow it.  As you evolve and begin to trust  more deeply in your own Divine nature, intuition will simply become ordinary, no longer needing to be practiced.

The world in general has been trained lifetime after lifetime to look outside of itself for answers, guidance, and happiness which makes perfect sense in a world of duality and separation, for most did not realize there was anywhere else to look.  However, since  duality automatically manifests as  pairs of opposites, the results of looking to the outer are sometimes good, and sometimes not so good.

Most of you are no longer of this energy,  you have "graduated" and come to know that the outer things are interpretations of consciousness.  Mind is the substance of matter.  In third dimensional consciousness, the outer is most often formed through human effort--matter manipulated to make it work.  However, because there is no law supporting  man made forms, there is nothing to hold them in place-- a lesson many are painfully learning at this time.

Those who have always achieved exactly what they desired regardless of any  harm it may of caused other humans or Gaia, are now finding or soon will find that these manipulative ways no longer work, this type of energy is dissolving.  Many who presently sit comfortably on thrones made of ego and self importance will discover that they sit within castles made of sand.

The new and higher resonating energies do not eliminate wealth or power but serve to lift it into  higher forms.  Abundance is a quality of the Divine, ever present already within every individual and held infinitely in place by Divine Law.  The higher consciousness of abundance in all its forms  flows easily and infinitely as oneness,  love, and service--never a tool for personal selfishness. There is nothing evil or wrong about financial abundance.  Like all other qualities of the Divine, through the belief in two powers,  abundance  has been misinterpreted and thus manifests in the world as either too much or too little.  Remember, you are powerful beings, your thoughts and words create, and each time you say; "I don't have.", mind interprets that and forms it in your outer experience.

Arcturian Group wishes to discuss change.  We observe many who retreat into fear and resistance whenever the familiar dissolves or changes.  When  old forms dissolve, know that  the Divine idea behind the form is  still present.  Divine Ideas are changeless and are held forever in place by Divine Law.  Because of this, newer and better forms of every Divine Idea take the place of that which dissolves--if you allow it.

Example: At one point the Divine idea of Omnipresence was interpreted in human consciousness as walking,  then evolved to  riding  horses, then to  horses pulling  sleds or carriages.  Then came the model T and all that has followed it--Omnipresence manifesting as jet planes, elegant automobiles, and fast rails, and it does not end there, there is no end.  Divine ideas never change, what the world lives and sees depends upon  how these ideas are  interpreted according to the consensus consciousness  or individuals.  This is what you are lifting into more Light.

There are those who still base their sense of self  in whatever perceived qualities of value they have--how beautiful they are, how much money they make, or how fashionably they dress . This is seen in the mindless worship and imitation of the rich and famous.  Individuals drawn to imitation are not yet awake to their own Divine Nature, and so have no real sense of self worth.   This state of consciousness  frequently lashes out through violence because the individual feels left out, unworthy, and rejected.  They are frequently are drawn to positions of authority where they are able to act out legally.

Some with a consciousness of unworthiness simply choose to suffer silently, but their energy field often attracts those of a  "bully" state of consciousness because  both carry the same energy of unworthiness--like energy attracts like energy.  Bullying cannot be solved by punishment, but by the attainment of a sense of worth within the individual.  These types of issues are usually carried from past life experiences and need to be cleared at their root, not with medication but with truth.

Many fear the loss of themselves in the process of evolution.  Over lifetimes of infinite experience as human beings, every person develops a personal sense of self and is usually ready to defend it at all costs.  When an individual begins to realize that he must move beyond many of the very qualities he believes to be who he is, he panics.  This can be a terrifying experience especially for strong personalities  and is the point at which some choose to end their spiritual quest.

Your claim to fame, your personality--you, must be surrendered  in order to evolve??  Surely not! What will be  left?  Nothing?   It is at this point that many strong, powerful, and outgoing individuals begin to visualize the  holy cards nuns handed out to school children--men and women with eyes raised and hands folded--booooring.  Nah!

Never fear losing anything real dear ones, for you only ever release and leave behind that false sense of self you have been entertaining about who and what you are.  Nothing real can ever be lost.  You will discover that you are still you, now empowered in higher ways of seeing and being as the real aspects of you become stronger and more enhanced.  You are becoming a new and improved version.

As evolved individuals, you will continue to live and move and  be in the world, but  be much less touched by it.  You will find yourselves able to enter the fray of work, home, or play, and not be tempted to enter into it.  There is no longer anything for lower resonating energies to attach to  for your energy field is now of a higher resonance.

This is Lightwork dear ones.  You came to awaken, evolve, and then help those struggling to do the same.  Forget any dreams you may of had about ascending and then sitting back comfortably as an observer for the rest of your time on earth, or skipping off to a quiet convent or monastery.  No, any Light you attain is not only for you, but for the world in whatever ways or places you may find yourselves.

Many of you are beginning to experience  all sorts of odd situations because you have become carriers of Light--Light workers.  Do not be surprised or put off by the experiences that may start to come your way, for you will be drawn to where you are needed and those who need you (not want) will be drawn to you.  As Lightworkers you will soon find that any old concepts you may still hold of "proper, dignified, or correct" go out the window but at the same time you will discover in this work a love for  mankind that you did not know you were capable of.  Lightwork dear ones, consists of being the Light in whatever form it is needed.  It goes with you wherever you go because it is you.

If you have been in some  difficult situation (home, work, relationship) you will start to notice  that it is unable to affect you as it once did simply because you no longer resonate with that energy or give it power.  This often represents a completion of some sort and is usually part of one's soul contract.  Spiritual resolution of some old karmic issue gives an individual freedom to leave the situation, or even find himself somehow removed from it.  However, there are times in which these situations are a person's chosen Lightwork, that is to simply to remain and be the Light.  Always ask for Guidance and trust your intuition.

Soon you are going to be seeing more and  more change that you will recognize as spiritual.  Up to this point you have all wondered when  you will  see some proof that all the evolutionary ideas are real.  Do not expect changes to appear as explosions dear ones, but seek intuitively behind the headlines, and on the faces and in the words of those around you.   Examine how you feel about what is going on in the world today versus a year or two ago.

Much of the violence in the Middle East  is very old, ancient energy that must be cleared and played out in order for Gaia to clear herself.  Your focus must be on spiritual growth and awareness and then the living of it, for you have nothing to offer the world if you remain in the same old universal belief system.

If you are clearing old energies and resolving old karmic situations, allow the process but do not get so enmeshed in them that you spend the rest of your life laying on a couch declaring that you can do nothing because you are clearing.  If you are guided toward some action,  do it.  If you are guided to be silent and hold the energy of Light for some world situation or person, do it.  It is a new time in which old solutions and rules no longer work so it is fruitless to keep trying to make them work.

In this new time and new energy,  rejoice dear ones for you are very close to seeing a new earth.
Greetings once again from the Arcturian Group. We wish to speak of transformation, a seemingly simple topic, but one that is important to the understanding of truth.  Transformation flows through and as an individual when he awakens out of the dream.   It manifests as the ability to  "see with new eyes and hear with new ears"  while in the midst of duality and separation.  Transformation allows one to recognize whatever false concepts and beliefs he may still hold and replace them with truth.   It brings the ability to say; "I was wrong."

Those unable to allow transformation, delay their ascension into a consciousness of higher dimensional energy.  Fear of change acts to support the continuation of  third dimensional  concepts and beliefs.  Many who resist change are in positions as world "leaders" who acquaint any sort of transformation with loss--loss of their personal power and wealth. Because of their leadership positions, they often attract followers who blindly accept whatever these so called "leaders" believe, giving away personal power in the process.

You are now at the point in your spiritual journey dear ones, where you must acknowledge and reclaim your innate power.  Many of you have done this already, having attained this state of consciousness in other lifetimes, entering into this lifetime with this state of consciousness already in place.

Never fear to say;  "Enough is enough, I no longer choose to live, act, be, or think in old outdated concepts of separation".  Some of you may have already discovered that there willable those who are offended by this.  Friends may drop away, but be not afraid  if this happens dear ones, for energy seeks its own and will soon draw to you those of your resonance.

We speak of transformation now because you are very close to seeing transformation take place.  Much is to be revealed and you must be prepared both within and without for you will be the ones called upon to assist those in fear, unable to let go of their old and comfortable ways of understanding the world.  Mankind is no longer being allowed lazily float from one day to the next believing that the government,  church , parent, friend, or society in general will take care of everything for them.  You are the consciousness and thus substance of the outer world and things are quickly changing.

It is time to claim your identity as Divine Beings who chose to learn  and assist others within third dimensional energy.   Allow the process.  For some, allowing the process may simply mean becoming  be-ers instead of do-ers--allowing themselves to be still and at rest, going within often while old energies surface and clear.  Others may find themselves  being guided to stand up and be counted in some way.

Transformation is a surrender, the ability to open oneself to change.   Surrender is not the giving up of self to some unknown "pie in the sky God" concept.  Spiritual surrender is the  natural result of having clear understanding of what one is surrendering to--Truth.  It begins with a strong inner drive to begin a quest for truth which can take many many paths, but which eventually leads to discovering IT within.  This  process cannot be avoided for it is who you are.

There are many who "suspect" the deeper truths but refuse to embrace them, choosing instead to believe that others more "holy" or intelligent, know more than they do.  No dear ones, all have the Divine Voice within,  it is simply a matter of acknowledging, listening, and trusting.  The time is now.

Valentine's Day!
Yes, we are aware of your customs and we join with you for is it not a day that celebrates love?  Love is  all there is, for ONE can never be divided.  It  is only the belief that One can be divided (separation) that has resulted in  the outward manifestations of war, discord, suffering, lack, limitation etc.

Valentine's Day celebrates the romantic/partnership facet of Divine Love.  There are teachings that  preach the "ungodliness" of romantic love and that in order to be "holy" you  must forgo  romantic connections.   Nonsense, this is a part of the same teachings  saying that you must suffer in order to be "holy".  These are man created beliefs with no spiritual law to support them.

However, romantic love must be understood on deeper levels if it is to "work",  and this is the missing element of so many human relationships.  Attraction between two people does not always mean you are meant to marry or establish an intimate relationship with them.  Attraction often occurs as the result of past life connections and frequently happens with someone you intuitively know would not be a good partner for you.

When two people with an intense past life history  meet (male/male, female/female,or male/female) there can be either instant attraction or instant repulsion. Many gay couples have been together in other lifetimes as heterosexuals.  Connections do not end  with death, for you are consciousness, not just physical bodies.

Marriage or committed relationships often happen as the result of pre-birth choices by both parties for the purpose of resolving some unfinished past life issues which may or may not have began as romantic partnerships.  Often those energies needing to be cleared  have their origin in ancient roles lived as mother/child, father/child, friend/friend, servant/master etc. Present life relationships  can provide an easy path in which to bring closure.  This is often the case in those relationships where one or both wonder; "Why did I marry this person?"

Always look deeper dear ones, there really are no accidents at this point.  Look into what you are learning or meant to learn from every situation. Karmic closure can take place even if only one person desires it.  If  he/she is able to recognize the other as an un-awakened Divine being and also chooses to no longer live within an energy of judgement and hatred (which simply serves to feed the karmic situation) then they have reached that place of unconditional love and there is karmic resolution.   An individual can now leave the situation if they choose, knowing that it is finished.

Sometimes two people are intensely attracted to each other on all levels, but for some reason this never unfolds into a relationship. This happens with some who choose in their pre-birth planning not to be with each other in this lifetime.  They understand that intense past life connections and love would not allow them to seek and spiritually grow into their own awareness and power if they were together--they would  be content to simply be together.

Romantic love must be rooted and grounded  in real love or it is simply animal attraction which sadly many consider to be real love.  This concept of love is promoted heavily in all areas of media-film, books, TV shows, magazines, advertising, etc. and particularly on Valentine's Day.

The wise know that sexual attraction alone is not love but is a facet of it, one of the "added" things.  Sexual attraction by itself is based in the human need to propagate the species which can be accomplished without  love.  Intimacy based only in sexual attraction never carries the intense and deep energetic connection and fulfillment that is possible when both are of a consciousness that sees beyond appearances to the deeper realities shining through the other's eyes.

Love relationships  are never dependent upon how the other looks or dresses and it is fruitless and very human to attempt to mold someone into your concept of the perfect partner.  Healthy relationships have similar energy resonance and those in them have close world views  but do not necessarily think and believe exactly as each other because all are here to learn and grow according to their individual need.

Two well matched individuals  be it friends or partners, have attained similar states of consciousness. Observe those living out from un-awakened states of consciousness who enjoy relationships of fights, cheating, anger, angst, and make-ups-- they are both on the same energetic wave length  so to speak--it is their state of consciousness, their concept of how relationships work.

There may be a time when you are tempted to enter in to the lower awareness level of another because of attraction and desire for this person.   Although certainly allowed by free will, it can never result in the happy outcome desired but instead usually ends in heartbreak after a quick, short, intense time together.  One simply cannot go backward to outgrown states of consciousness no matter how appealing doing this may seem.

Misconceptions abound regarding love and partnering.  Governments, religions, families, and friends continually spew that love is only valid if it meets their often very narrow concepts.  The partner must be of a certain  color, gender, education, financial status, or  other acceptable trait.  Love is the experience of One self manifesting as the many.  Love never has been and never will be dependent on mankind's concepts.

There comes a  point at which an individual  no longer "needs a relationship" in order to feel complete, happy, and whole because they have attained a consciousness of spiritual wholeness and completeness.  They have discovered their twin flame to be within, and being in relationship now becomes a personal choice.

Happy relationships only happen when each understands and accepts their own true worth and power because then there is no longer the need for outside validation.  Unawareness of one's true identity causes the un-awakened to seek their completeness from outside of themselves. "If I am married to this good looking, rich, smart person, then I must be loveable and valuable".
Many still carry old cellular memory from times when being in a partnership may of been the only way to avoid death or starvation and this is often reflected in those who jump from one partnership to another never allowing themselves to be alone.  Recognize and allow these old cellular memories to clear if you suspect them in yourselves.

As you grow stronger within, you will look back at past failed attempts at romance and laugh, saying;  "Thank you dear God  for saving me from this relationship."  even though at the time you may of been heartbroken and hurting.  The human mind is programmed to  world concepts of romance and sex and responds thusly until you teach it differently.

If having a life partner represents completeness for you,  you will  draw this to yourself without thought and struggle because it will be the natural manifestation of your state of consciousness, your realization of spiritual completeness.  Being alone may represent completeness for some.

True, deep, and lasting relationships do include romance, great sex, and all that the rigid, structured,  Puritan state of consciousness deemed unholy,  but these are now recognized as being the added things.

We the Arcturian Group send love, joy, fun, and awareness to you all for Valentine's Day.

We come again dear ones, to speak of love and oneness, for in reality there is nothing else.  Accepting this has proven difficult for many, because outer appearances testify to separateness.  Society promotes and functions from this viewpoint and it is what you have taken for granted through many lifetimes. Yes, indeed the many do appear separate, but it is individuality within ONE omnipresent Consciousness that you see.

As you mature spiritually there comes a point where you no longer judge by appearances because you understand that what you see  is the mind interpretation of ever present spiritual realities.  This is why the world has been called "illusion" by so many enlightened masters.  The world is not illusion, how it is perceived  is the illusion.

Images of separation and duality are expressions of a world consensus consciousness of separation and duality. You are now evolving and moving beyond the beliefs of an un-awakened consciousness--leaving behind that which has governed you for so long.  The message of Oneness is pouring from many spiritually reliable sources because mankind is ready to hear and embrace this,  but for some, even those well along in their journey, the idea of Oneness can be difficult.

Most of you have moved beyond considering spiritual ideas  to be simply dinner party conversation and have also discovered that you no longer care to engage in arguments about religion.  World wide there has been a gradual shifting into a consciousness  that sees and understands that there are many paths up the mountain, but only one mountain.  Differences that once seemed  important simply no longer exist as they once did.

Many find that even as they clear and move beyond old fears and difficulties, they still must live, work, and function in third dimensional situations. This is why you are here dear ones, to remember who you are in spite of appearances to the contrary. While on earth as it is, you will always witness some three dimensional activities.   When you find yourself in these situations, keep your energy field clear and filled with Light, which does not allow you to be pulled into lower resonating energy.  Live each moment of each day, doing what is given you to do and saying what needs to be said from a place of unconditional love and you will not be in or of the lower resonating energy.  However, as we have stated many times, this never means being a "doormat".

Never broadcast spiritual awareness and knowledge to those not of a consciousness to understand it in hopes of changing some unpleasant situation. Your sacred connection to the Divine within  must be kept silent, secret, and protected  like a newborn babe, until  it grows and becomes strong enough to withstand any influence that would take it from you.

Keep the Sacred Self safe and warm, feed it, love it, and watch it grow.  As it becomes stronger it will  begin to manifest outwardly when you least expect it, in ways you never dreamed of.  It may verbalize the perfect solution to resolve some intense  situation even though you had never consciously considered such a solution.  You many find yourself taking some action (be it small or large) that you had not planned, but which turns out to make some positive impact or previously un-considered change.  These are the activities of the deeper, stronger, and more real YOU.

When  experiences of this sort begin to appear, you start to understand how the unconditioned  (by world beliefs)  consciousness works.  As an individual begins to evolve and grow more deeply into a consciousness of truth , his mind becomes increasingly unconditioned and begins to replace the previous human, thinking, plotting, planning, mind steeped in concepts about everything.   A mind no longer conditioned by false beliefs of duality and separation,  interprets the world accordingly.  Everyone has had experiences of simply "knowing" without thought at some time when it was needed. Do not diminish these experiences, but embrace and celebrate them.

This higher state of consciousness can only unfold as you choose and allow it.  It grows stronger through practice and trust.  IT is not some magic button inside a "you" that is separate and apart from the Divine,  but it IS YOU, the totality of YOU.  Be not afraid dear ones, now when you are being asked to leap off the cliff of your familiar, leaving behind those things that have represented security for you  (even though much of that familiar security may have been experienced as discord and pain).

Humans tend to hold tightly to what they are familiar with.  Remember this when you are deciding whether or not to move beyond someone or some situation in your life that you know has completed and can only serve to hold you in old energy. All is proceeding according to plan for everyone who has made the choice to evolve, even though it may not look that way.  We see Light flowing with ever increasing intensity with each person who awakens out of the illusion.

Never forget that you chose specifically to incarnate within this ascension time frame in order complete your own issues through experiences and clearings, and then move on to assist in the awakening of others.  Try not to drag your feet, "hemming and hawing" that things must be this way or that before you can be more "spiritual".  You already are spiritual, it is just a matter of accepting it.

God is all there is, and therefore you must also be this same  "all that is"--there can be nothing outside of Omnipresence.  The sooner you allow yourself to accept this, the sooner you can begin living it.

Each time you sit quietly, resting in the Light of your own Divinity, you are adding awareness to universal consciousness.  Meditation no longer needs to be the heavily structured process most of you were taught.  Meditation teachings that state;   "you must sit this way, keep the spine straight, and feet on the floor", etc. etc. were simply disciplines designed to help beginners quiet themselves and concentrate within. Structure is  necessary for an un-enlightened human mind used to being busy every second, but you are no longer beginners.

The goal of meditation is simply to rest in a quiet awareness of Oneness--that silent place where you can sigh and state to yourself;  "I and the Father are ONE" and then rest for a moment or two in that peace. This holy place eventually becomes easy to access and is part of every waking moment at which time, meditation as you know it is no longer necessary because you are living  it.

Practice being centered as you go about your chores, your employment, walk through a quiet forest, or even down a busy city street.  You can do this in the midst of a difficult day simply by finding a bathroom, closing the door, taking a deep breath, and resting in  "I am".

Meditation need not be as difficult as so many believe it to be.  Difficulties come when it is entered into with expectations based on concepts  heard about or read regarding what must happen, what it must look like, or what one must feel.  Meditation is simply the practice of resting in what you already are, and is not something you must attain.  Let go of teachings that say meditation must be a certain way or it is not valid.  Your decision to go within is your validity.   You ARE that which you are seeking.

Keep  sacred practices and unfoldments secret and silent within, for these constitute the Babe that must be kept safe until strong and grown. Share your spiritual pearls only with those who are connoisseurs of pearls.

All is One.  Remember that, live that, be that, and you will change the  world.

Greetings dear ones.  We come to say that much is happening on your planet that cannot yet be seen with  physical eyes.  However, you are beginning to feel change in the energy of your personal  world as well as on the universal level.  You may begin to  notice  more camaraderie among those around you--a sense of oneness that did not seem to be there before.  You may notice it within some group you are familiar with like a club you belong to or in family gatherings.  You will notice more unity and less sense of separateness.

These changes are the result of the high resonating Light now pouring onto earth and available to all who are receptive.  Every particle of Light feeds the consciousness of an awakening  world.  Many who were previously oblivious or blindly accepting of world conditions,  now find themselves to be more aware and quickly growing weary of the constant bickering and adolescent behavior of so many self serving world "leaders".  Seeing with new eyes, they are beginning to take note of those who serve only to feed their pockets.  The eyes of mankind are opening and personal power is beginning to be reclaimed.

Thus, as  society awakens, it automatically begins to move into its power.  Even a small thing like signing a petition, helps to activate world energy into new directions. It is not about giving energy to some negative appearance, but rather it is about taking whatever human footsteps may assist others to notice, on their level  of awareness.

You are in the midst of awakening to who you are, realizing that you are and never were less than those who hold power of some sort or another.  Appearances will not change until you change them, for the outer manifestations you see simply represent the consensus consciousness of the majority which at this time is still heavily enmeshed in duality and separation.

The whistle blowers of the world are courageous souls, not to be reviled  as many would have you believe. They are helping to awaken those who  blindly accept everything they are told--the sleeping ones who have given away their power to those claiming to own it.  Despite personal danger to themselves they speak words that need to be heard.  Those who stand to lose personal power or wealth from this information would have you believe that these people are criminals.  No, they are serving to assist the people of the world to wake up, open their eyes, and  hopefully take back their power.

Do what you can each day to awaken others but never in a preaching or  proselytizing way.  It must be done with love and  kindness and respect for the other's belief system.  Often it is not words, but simply your energy field filled with Light that helps to awaken another who is  receptive. Speak the deeper truths only when guided to, when a person is ready to hear or is seeking truth, always trusting your intuition.

We wish to speak of trust--a very misunderstood word.  Trust in its truest sense reflects a state of consciousness able to rest in awareness, living the experiences of each moment from center which often appears to the world as a doing nothing.  In reality, doing nothing is to hold blind faith in some concept, person, or thing--which is  often seen as trust.

Blind faith comes from accepting third dimensional concepts of God,  angels, saints, or even the government  without question, simply because it is what you have been told.  Blind faith is ignorance dear ones, and represents the surrendering of personal power to an unknown something deemed to have power--it is not trust. This is not to say that the angels and Beings of Light are not there to assist you, but to assist you, not do the work for you.

Trust is the natural offspring of a state of consciousness imbued with spiritual truth and not dogma or rites and rituals handed down and accepted from generation to generation.  Trust is the living out from and resting in a consciousness  aware and  knowledgeable of what is real and spiritually  true.

Trust simply becomes natural at a certain level of awareness, but is never  attained through forever looking outside of one's self, for no matter how much the teacher or path may be revered by society, at a certain point the spiritual journey must become a  solo one, a shift to one own Center.

This is not to say that you will never be guided to some book, class, or teacher along the way but it is to say that you must always listen to  your intuition, and when something feels finished, don't be afraid to leave it and  move on.  Many paths and teachings are only needed for a short while--steps along the way to be left behind at some point which then allows new and higher phases of the journey to begin.

Trust manifests as the student learns to withdraw energy and power from outside forces and place it where it is,  in Divine Oneness. Trust is aware of what is, instead of 3D concepts of what is. The journey through  third dimensional lifetimes has been a stepping and falling, stepping and falling but at some point growth begins to come by Grace and fear dissolves. The spiritual student finally understands who and what he is, and is able to rest in that awareness.  This is Trust.

All of you are ready for this, dear ones.  All of you are spiritually aware on  levels enabling you to begin living, moving, and having your being in true Trust. It is only the world's continued dependence on concepts and beliefs that keeps it in bondage.  Trust lifts the burdens from your personal back and removes the mental drive to "do, do, do", which is the focus of intellectual thinking as well as can be found in many metaphysical teachings.

The metaphysical  protocols were necessary in the beginning, and are still important for the newly awakening, but you are no longer beginners.  You have completed that phase and are ready to shift from the "do, do, do" mentality  into "Be, Be, Be".  Now it is about growing beyond the metaphysical (taking a bad picture and making it into a good picture) and moving into mysticism  (the conscious realization that in reality nothing needs changing).

Rites and rituals  serve their purpose but for most of you, are finished.  The journey is now about a consciousness shift transferring power from the without to the within-- whether the without be "good" or  "bad".    Every belief in some power outside of yourselves must be let go of, and each letting go helps  release you from any bondage to it.  Know that even   "good" appearances are concepts.

Letting go of something does  NOT means you cannot or will not ever again enjoy the finer things of life, nor does it mean you cannot take part in some religious ceremony or service.  It simply means that you no longer imbue these things with a power they do not have, whether over you or for you.  You begin to see the reality behind all appearances and  understand the truths  being represented through rites and ritual, knowing that in and of themselves they have no power.

Because the outer is an expression of one's state of consciousness, as he shifts from a consciousness of duality and separation into a consciousness of truth and Oneness, he will find that the outer forms begin to  manifest in new and higher ways. Never fear the loss of something, for if you carry the substance of it in  consciousness it will re-appear, often in some new and better form.  For example; An attained consciousness of wholeness and completeness often manifests outwardly in simple things like finding the perfect parking spot but can and does also manifest as the right partner, job, or  new order and peace in your life.

Mind is the interpreter of one's state of consciousness translating it into forms appropriate for each individual. If living alone represents wholeness for someone, their attained consciousness of completeness  will not manifest outwardly  as a partner.  Likewise,  a consciousness imbued with  concepts and beliefs of duality and separation must appear as experiences of both good and bad--duality.

This is the purpose of the physical, emotional, and mental clearings you are experiencing now.  Even those awake and evolved still carry cellular memories from past lifetimes lived fully in a consciousness of duality and separation and these  need to be released and cleared.

You are ready.

Dear ones, We send  wishes for a Happy New Year and add that a year of the new it will be, for you have already cleared much of the energy that held you in bondage to an old state of consciousness and this will allow the new to unfold.

Never believe that your efforts to learn and express love are  wasted or insignificant, for every spark of light and awareness serves to decrease the density of a general world consciousness based in duality and separation.  Each day the Light of the world is becoming brighter and lighter because of the unfolding awareness of so many.  All are in and of the One and therefore the Light you acknowledge within yourself,  you also acknowledge for the world.

Love is the key to everything dear ones--love of self and love of everything in your life.  Love every aspect of your lives--the nice as well as the not so nice, for every experience  can act to bring you into deeper spiritual awareness if you allow yourself to dig and discover the beliefs behind the experience.

It is impossible to truly love anything until you allow self to love self.  A consciousness   selective with regard to love, one that  excludes self, reflects the third dimensional beliefs of duality and separation.  A consciousness that excludes self can never express love in its highest sense because it does not yet contain it.

Concepts and beliefs about love in an un-awakened society are usually based on sexual attraction, power, and the need to feel loved, all of which are relentlessly promoted through the media, "experts", family, friends etc.   Only LOVE, which is the recognition, realization, and action of a state of consciousness reflecting the ONE SELF will shift world consciousness into its next level of evolution.

Many say; "Oh but you don't know the awful things I have done.  I could never love myself because I am not worthy of love."   Others may say; "I was always told and treated as a child that I was unworthy or unlovable, and I just can't let that go."  YES YOU CAN!  It is time to stop continually feeding  the issues, beliefs, concepts, memories and whatever still  holds you in bondage. These things have only the power you feed them and you who read these messages are evolved enough at this point to acknowledge this, allowing any "victim mentality" of the past to cease and dissolve into the nothingness that it is.

This is what clearing old energy is all about, the more intensely you may experience something the more it is spiritually begging to be looked at and cleared.  Clearings are graduations, and not negative experiences.  Lovingly allow them by getting to the root of your belief system, no matter how physically, emotionally, or mentally painful the process may be.  Once something is cleared spiritually it is gone, you have uprooted it and not just cut off a branch that will re-sprout at some later date.

The more an individual focuses on human problems the more these issues become firmly embedded within consciousness.  Be alert to your thoughts as you go about your day. There comes a time in everyone's spiritual journey when it is necessary to surrender everything that no longer serves his evolution.  Much of what you considered to be who and what you are, is now changing.   The new you is moving into a new state of consciousness but it cannot happen while grasping tightly to the old.  This is what is meant in the bible story of not putting new wine into old wineskins.

You are not your past actions whether of lifetimes long ago or this one, even if that lifetime was filled with seeming errors.  Learn to love the mistakes you have made along the way and give gratitude for them because this is how you learn and grow.  It is only the third dimensional consciousness that affixes blame and shame.  These messages are being read by those ready to take the next steps--YOU. Those not ready, do not resonate with these words.

Bless and love everything in your life, always remembering that every soul makes pre-birth choices regarding the necessary evolutionary experiences he needs and is evolved enough handle .  An example is that many who experience harsh and abusive childhoods have specifically chosen that particular situation in order to activate and once and for all resolve issues of low self esteem and self loathing or to resolve some karmic relationship that has been in place for many lifetimes.

Many have not been able to clear the more deeply buried issues until now  when the higher dimensional energies are flowing intensely, giving them the strength and guidance to do the work.  Some issues needing to be cleared will not come to conscious awareness until the individual  is ready and this is determined by their Higher Self.  Clearings of more intense and deeply held energies often clear in layers, so if you have done the work to clear and resolve something and find that lo and behold it is back, just know that you are now ready to clear the next layer and will know when it is finished.

Many who struggle with some physical, emotional, or mental difficulty are only now evolved enough to  move through and resolve issues behind it, usually from lifetimes ago. Love and honor the courage of those who struggle dear ones, for many that seem handicapped in some way are old and wise souls who chose their situation in order to quickly evolve learn something.  Often it is an evolved soul who chooses to be born  handicapped or stillborn in order to assist in the evolution of the parents.

Love does not mean you must have emotional feelings for everyone.  Feelings and emotions are often tied to human concepts of love.  Love is the recognition, acceptance, and honoring of self, others, and everything as spiritual, for there is nothing but God.  Period.   It is only three dimensional beliefs of separation  that cause everything in the world to seem separate.

Look in the mirror each day and say to yourself "I LOVE YOU".  Warts and all, I love you.  Love the warts, for they are you and you are not separate from the ONE.  Mankind is on the brink of  entering into a time of awakening, leaving behind that spiritually immature  consciousness filled with false ideas and untruths. The world has been asking and praying for this, and yet remains reluctant to embrace it, afraid of leaving behind what is familiar no matter how unpleasant.

This, now, is the time for trust, trusting that the dance is finished, following a certain ritual, book, or Guru is finished.   This, now, is the time to accept that You are IT.  That which you have been desiring, searching for, praying for, you already are, but it is up to each individual as to whether or not they accept this.   Free will allows everyone to play in the dream for as long as they wish, but the door is open now for those who choose to enter in.

Let the new year of 2015 be one of celebration in the midst of whatever occurs.  Celebrate each day, giving gratitude for all things.  Celebrate your awakening, and celebrate who you are by no longer giving  power to the illusions of the third dimensional belief system.  Starve these  pictures of their power through your recognition of Divine  Light within each and every individual regardless of what they are reflecting outwardly.  Everyone is  learning, but the lessons of others need not become yours.

2015 is going to be a year of awakening and change for many.   Those holding tightly to old concepts and beliefs will find themselves removed from them one way or another and it is much easier to make the choice yourself rather than  have the Universe do it for you.

LOVE yourselves, dear ones.  LOVE is our message today and always.   LOVE is the key to all things.  LOVE is the answer you seek and is all there is.

LOVE EVERYTHING.

Greetings from the Arcturian Group.  Know that everything is proceeding according to plan, and be not afraid dear ones, for the many changes and upheavals happening on earth at this time are all  proof of the shifting energy of evolution.  Remember as you observe chaos taking place in the world, that what has become old, more often than not, only leaves after a great deal of resistance.

We wish to speak today of change, a topic we have spoken of before.   There are many who as of yet do not associate needed change with personal change.  These dear ones see and work toward change in politics, religion, and government, but do not realize that they themselves are the politics, religion, and government.  Outer change can only manifest from the substance from which it is formed--consciousness.

You as creators, have over time created many different three dimensional worlds, each  manifesting the belief system and consensus consciousness of the times.  When enough people awaken, the enlightened world consciousness will once again shift the dynamic of the whole, for consciousness and its manifestation are one and the same.  Notice that as concepts and beliefs change (states of consciousness) laws and acceptable ways of living also change.

Change is extremely  difficult for those who find  security and comfort in sameness.  It is very easy to rest back in ways that up to now have  worked to bring a  level of harmony and peace regardless of how it was accomplished. These dear ones struggle and  resist, and often without thought automatically bring judgement and criticism to any suggestions of change in their personal world or the world in general.  This is an expression of fear.

Those accustomed to believe without question what authority  figures tell them, respond with; "We have always done it this way and it has worked. The government, priest, expert has said...".   However this mind set is no longer working because the energy manifesting and supporting it is dissolving. These ways  were perfect and necessary for their time, but it is a NEW TIME, and if you look closely, you will discover cracks beginning to appear in the foundation of long held world concepts.

Many commonplace ideas, beliefs, and world solutions  no longer resonate with an awakening mankind and because they no longer hold the belief energy necessary to keep them in place, are crumbling. This appears as chaos and brings about all varieties of  fear for those of a superstitious and  un-awakened states of consciousness.

In your personal lives many of you are discovering that long standing relationships with certain friends or members of your family seem to be weakening--you are no longer  on the same page so to speak.  This is because resonance attracts like resonance.  If you have made a shift in consciousness, you no longer resonate with those who remain in the previous energy.  This can be very confusing and even hurtful for those who do not understand and interpret the situation on a three dimensional level.

It is not that  you are better than them, it is simply a matter of being in a new place energetically--like energy attracts like energy.   Often there comes a point in the spiritual journey at which the student finds they have no friends at all.  This is the point at which you must trust this part of the journey, not trying to fix or make things work again according to popular thinking.   Very quickly the student will find that those of a similar resonance are attracted into their sphere, and become the new friends.  Know that you are being guided every step of the way and cannot be other than on your chosen path.

Fear governs the actions of many large corporations and individuals as they observe their business models no longer resonating with the majority.  This is happening in the medical/pharmaceutical fields as well as with organized religions and world  governments.  Frequently no holds are barred financially or dishonestly in  the effort to bring customers back.

Without evolving change in the consciousness of a business and individuals involved,  heavy promotion tactics simply will not work because as with individuals, the energy no longer resonates--they are not speaking to the new consciousness and  people are not so easily fooled as they once were.  You will begin to observe this frantic struggle to make the old work as it once did,  more and more in all sorts of situations.

Change is often difficult for spiritual leaders and light workers if their focus and teachings have been  locked into specific practices and teachings. They will find that what once worked , no longer works.  This is because any spiritual practice or beliefs  rigidly not allowed to evolve, will not resonate with the evolving consciousness of serious seekers.  As students move on and fewer are attracted, many a sincere spiritual teacher is left to wonder why and this question will become the teachers lesson.

Dogma, rigidity, and righteousness have no place in true spirituality for they represent stagnation--impossible within an omnipresent and  infinitely unfolding Divine Consciousness.  Duality and separation beliefs  cannot be carried into the new energy.

Work, play, beliefs, practices, and every spark of daily living is moving into  new and higher expression.  Your job is stand back and allow, letting  go of any attempts to figure it all out with the mind according outdated and often incorrect world beliefs.  A mind  conditioned through many lifetimes with third dimensional beliefs needs time to reprogram.  This means allowing new awareness's to integrate and become one's state of consciousness while at the same time releasing everything recognized as old and finished.

The minute there is resistance to anything, an energy block is created.  We are not saying you must embrace every new idea of truth that presents itself,  for always there must be discernment ( a facet of personal power).  Be alert to  ideas and beliefs being  hyped as "new" that are simply repackaged "old".    It is imperative that without pre-judgment, you honestly examine in the light of your unfolding evolution, every concept and belief you  hold as true or become newly aware of even if  just to say; "Interesting".

Non resistance is  much easier than fighting every idea that may be different from what you have always believed.  It is ego (the sense of separation from the whole), that does not want to admit it may of been incorrect about something.  Let that false sense of self dissolve into the nothingness that it is dear ones, for it is simply the belief you are a human being who must struggle for every bit of recognition or value.

Never become spiritual door mats, living in fear of expressing personal choices because of rigidly binding man made rules that define spirituality.

It is time for all choosing to proceed on a spiritual evolutionary journey to trust that there is a bigger picture unfolding and that you need not know everything about it.  Be open, allow, and let go without fear for you can only expand  more and more--life is unending.

Trust that if you have chosen to evolve,  you are doing it.  The "train leaves the station" with your intent.  You will be on your chosen path and always guided  even when it seems as if nothing is happening. The do-ing part is complete for many of you.  It is time now for the Be-ing part which may seem right now to be a doing nothing.

Throughout time, you have been programmed to believe that spiritual progress could only happen with spiritual "do-ing--reading, writing, healing, studying, taking classes, having energy sessions. This has always been the way for spiritual growth and learning and you did all these things sincerely and well.

We do not say you will never again be guided to some teacher, book or class.  However, know that it is now a NEW TIME--a time for greater selectivity, trust, and allowing.  A time now to  listen,  rest in, live, and practice the truths you learned allowing yourselves to birth a new state of consciousness.

There is nothing to become, you already are.

Greetings once again dear ones.

We wish to explain that because so much is happening on the deeper levels,  you must be prepared for changes that will soon manifest on earth  in many areas.  Increasingly intense energies of transformation and clearing are bringing about physical,  emotional, mental, and spiritual change not only for individuals, but also for Gaia who is a living soul and not a piece of dirt.  This information is not given to cause fear, but simply to help you to understand that certain events are vital and necessary in order for mankind to evolve.  Know that always, those involved in earth events have  agreed on the deeper levels to be a part of the experience.

Never forget  that you are not simply flesh and blood bodies living on a physical planet.  The  time  is long past due for mankind to understand, accept responsibility, and correct the damage reaped upon Gaia  and all her life forms  in the name of greed.  As more and more people awaken, change is inevitable, but it often takes  a catastrophe or some devastating event for people to even question these things and the question is;   Is money worth the  continual destruction of life, including air and water?

As changes take place on earth,  learn to flow with them, not  resisting or struggling to keep the status quo in the belief that "The good old days" were better.


The United State is  celebrating a holiday of freedom at this time.  Do you truly understand freedom, or do you  continue to believe what you are told about how free you are?  Look around you dear ones, and observe how society has gradually allowed itself to be deprived of multiple freedoms under the guise of keeping you safe.   FEAR  is an effective means of control.  You need  these rules in order to be safe, don't  you...?   It is a NEW TIME.

Question everything you have heretofore accepted without question in the belief that anyone in authority must know what is best for you.  You are at a point in your evolutionary journey at which you must  reclaim the power and trust you ignorantly gave away.  Start by learning to  trust your inner guidance and no longer acting as lemmings blindly following a just as blind leader over the cliff. It is  time for peoples of all countries to stop waving  flags and shouting:  "My country right or wrong, my country".  It is time to move into a consciousness of the  Oneness of all people.   It is a NEW TIME.

As a result of many lifetimes lived in the third dimensional energy of duality and separation, a universal ignorance of oneness  became the consensus consciousness of mankind.   This sense of separation manifests outwardly as the haves and have not's of the world--some with power, intelligence, and strength and some without.  This belief system continues today,  allowing those with the most money or strength to control everyone else.   Up to now most have simply accepted  this.  There are still many people who have need for rules and laws and someone to tell them how to live. but for all awakening souls,  it is a NEW TIME.

Pause and think before voting for the individual with the loudest voice  promising exactly what you want to hear.  Question, ponder, and most importantly, go within to experience the resonance of the state of consciousness of the candidate.  Feel their energy, listen to the spaces between the words, trusting your intuition to guide you. This is how you begin to reclaim your innate power and move past the hype and noise created by those who would be in power.

This will create a true democracy, which was the intention of the founding fathers for the United States.  The United States was founded on deep spiritual principles which over time  have been manipulated for personal agendas and allowed to deteriorate from their original high resonating focus.  When personal religious beliefs and narrow concepts are allowed to determine laws effecting all but  benefiting the few,  true freedom is lost and the ideals of a declaration of independence no longer exist.

Many still hold  ideas of war with pride.  We too honor those who selflessly sacrificed themselves because these brave souls  were living out from their highest sense of right.  Living out from your highest sense of right is all that is required of anyone.  This way of resolving issues  has been  the consciousness of the world in the past and now.    However, it is a NEW TIME.

There is a popular  saying; "Freedom is not free".  Freedom IS free, it is the sense of separation and wars that act to prevent it.  Violence can never and will never bring peace.  They are two very separate energies.

You are ready to experience true freedom dear ones, the freedom that has been ever present as  your innate birthright and can  never be taken from  you for it is who you are.  However, freedom can only manifest from a state of consciousness that knows who and what it is--not who and what it has been told it is.

You are not meant  to live according to  the whims of corporations,  organized religions, and big government.  You ARE the corporations, religions, and government if you choose to be. This does not mean you must stand in the street shouting and protesting, for often this simply gives an issue more power, not less.  It does mean that silently, secretly, and quietly, you  begin to trust your ability to make your own choices regarding what you believe.  It means working for change--questioning, pondering, going within, and then taking whatever actions you may be guided to take which may simply be to send Light.  It means choosing not to limit yourselves to the "acceptable beliefs" of the third dimensional belief system.

Spirituality cannot be separated from daily living for it is one and the same but the world in general does not yet understand this.  God cannot be prayed to for victory of one group over another--there is only ONE.   Bring your highest level of spiritual awareness to every physical  emotional, and mental activity of daily living and you will find more awareness is given for you have opened the door.

Realize that true freedom can only be experienced personally and globally when there evolves a consciousness that all people and all living things are Divine and One within that Universal Consciousness many call God.

Freedom is your soul, your identity, the reality of you as spiritual beings.  You can never be separated from it unless you believe you can be.  It does not look that way because at this time the world is manifesting a gross  ignorance of this.  Freedom is  the essence of your very being and as this awareness becomes a global state of consciousness, it will manifest outwardly as the peace so many seek, while yet believing that war and separation will bring peace.

Celebrate the birth of your country dear ones, but never forget the real focus and intention that brought it into being. The event of independence that you celebrate on the 4th of July is not finished, but only represents the first layer of many evolutionary steps necessary for mankind to evolve into a consciousness of real freedom.

This message is given as always, with love for you, our sisters and brothers.

Dear ones we are well aware of the disappointment many of you feel as to how slowly the new earth seems to be emerging.  This is because you are viewing the process with specific expectations of how things "should" be according to whatever concepts you may be holding.   There is no fault in this,  as it simply reflects how you have learned to live life in third dimensional energy.

You expect evolutionary changes to manifest in certain familiar ways, but remember, the human consciousness is limited to what is already known.  Be open to what is as of yet unknown, for change is, and will manifest in unexpected ways.  Know that powerful new energies are silently pouring in and available to all,  but will not always manifest in the ways you expect. Much of what you perceive as chaos, is actually the  cleansing and clearing of old energy.

It is very important to take time to rest during the day for the process of integrating these powerful  new energies often leaves an individual feeling exhausted.   Even with busy work/family schedules it is important to include  small breaks  which can be as simple as  shutting a bathroom door and resting for a few minutes in the realization of "I AM".   If possible, a short nap works best.

The integration process does not happen overnight, but is exactly that,  a process.  Be patient dear ones, and let go of the temptation to believe  you are doing nothing simply because  you and the world are not as you had anticipated--yet.

Some, when feeling the need for a nap in the middle of the day,  resist, believing that it indicates  laziness or a physical backward step because it is something you have never before needed to do.  It is important not to resist, for the integration process requires a great deal of  energy, leaving less for the active lifestyle you may of become accustomed to. The person who insists on continuing old habits of going, going, going, in spite of a need for more rest, will soon find himself very depleted of energy

Taking time to stop and rest is not a doing nothing as it may appear, but is an action  integral to the releasing/integrating  process.  You have been programmed to believe that busy-ness equals productive and successful living.  Both school and parents taught you that time spent doing nothing was idleness, a bad thing, but as with so many other beliefs this is simply a concept handed down from generation to generation.

In past lifetimes this was true and thus many still carry cellular memory of lives in which those who did not plow and harvest, or work long and tedious hours for someone else, did not eat.  It is not meant that every moment of every day be a struggle.  Know that the energy of joy and fun is closest to Divine energy.

You are finding that much you previously believed to be truth has become gradually fading cellular memory.  You are beginning to understand that you are not simply physical bodies, but are consciousness in varying states of awareness who have chosen for learning purposes, to experience the physical world in a physical body. This is the root of the struggle for those who believe  they were born as either the wrong sex or skin color.

Cellular memory accumulated from lifetime after lifetime lived as one gender will dominate the state of consciousness of an individual and has nothing to do with the body.   Because these dear ones do not understand the bigger picture, they assume a physical mistake of some sort has occurred  and thus seek to fix it by becoming the gender they strongly resonate with.  Gender choice is a pre-birth decision made by each soul in order to integrate whatever male or female energies may be needed to create wholeness and balance.

Try not to judge or compare your journey with that of others, but instead closely examine everything you do not yet understand in your own personal experience or that of the world in order to find the hidden lessons--pearls of wisdom waiting to be discovered.   Everyone's journey is individual,  based on the experiences of past lifetimes.

More and more and moment by moment as you begin to resonate with the new and higher Light frequencies,  you will also begin to experience seeing and hearing higher dimensional energies.  Be not afraid when these things happen, but trust the  process for changes are happening and nothing is going to stay the same.  There is nothing to fear.   Those who continue to hold fast to what is finished, will find themselves grasping air in a dissolving world.

We wish to speak of gratitude which is the counter balance of love.  Gratitude in its purest sense, is the acknowledgement of  "I HAVE", and not simply the act of saying "thank you" for some good received as is commonly believed.   In this deeper spiritual sense, gratitude  acknowledges that every good seeming to come from outside of self is actually the manifestation of ever present wholeness and completeness.  Gratitude flows easily from a consciousness of one's innate completeness and abundance because of oneness with Source.

Unexpressed gratitude acts to  block to the flow so to speak,  for love and gratitude balance each other. Think of a coin--love on one side and gratitude on the other.  Begin to practice  gratitude in every area of your life--for what you have as well as what you believe you don't have materially, emotionally, mentally, and spiritually for the experience of lack serves as an important window into one's belief system.   Always remember that  painful lessons were chosen by you as necessary for attaining the growth and evolution you seek.

You are beginning to understand that you are creators, that your words and thoughts take form and manifest.  The act of expressing gratitude serves to retrain a cellular memory of lack into  "I have.  I am abundant and am infinitely  blessed by virtue of Oneness with Source" .  Living each day from this awareness allows you to experience the energy of love and helps you to more deeply  understand  whatever lessons you may be having.

Because gratitude is a facet of  love it  must be integrated along with all the other facets of love,  eventually  becoming your  attained state of consciousness, fully integrated and manifesting as unconditional LOVE.

Practice with the simple things  for gratitude need not a grand statement, but simply the awareness of "I have because I am".  As you drive to work give gratitude for a paved road and stop signs.   When you shop give gratitude for the ease and availability of what you may need.

Gratitude can be practiced  on all levels.  Materially it can be by giving away those things  you no longer need or use (not junk)  which tells your cells; "I am grateful that I have enough to share".   Emotionally giving a shoulder to cry on is the acknowledgement of  "I give thanks for the lessons that have provided me with broad shoulders".  Mentally,  giving words, information, intelligent guidance to those who seeking on that level says;  "I have been there, I can tell them how it worked for me. I am grateful for an ability to assist others. I have wisdom".

Even a penny donated in the spirit of love, carries powerful  energy for spirit knows nothing of material monetary values, but only recognizes intention.

Give gratitude for the fact that you have evolved to the place where you are able to recognize the Divine nature of everyone you come into contact with.  Express gratitude for someone's smile, a bird song, or a good book and you will soon come to realize that every single moment of an ordinary day holds infinite opportunities for gratitude.

This is the journey, this is what you have asked for, this is why you are here.  Your time on earth is a privilege.  Make the most of it.

Dear ones, rapid change is taking place for many by choice as well as by need.  The path of evolution can  difficult  up to the point at which a spiritual transition takes place and truth becomes one's state of consciousness and  begins to manifest at that level.  Much of what is being projected into world consciousness through the media, churches, government, etc., simply no longer resonates with many of you.   Long standing life styles and traditions often involving friends and/or family are beginning to  feel old and finished.

Some beliefs  are easily left behind and no one even notices, but frequently attempts toward personal change serve to activate a period of intense questioning, judgement, and criticism from family and friends. This may cause the awakening student to doubt or even return to what is familiar, but because he has evolved and is no longer resonating with the past, he will not stay in what is finished.

Confusion and doubt often occurs as an individual begins to receive and contemplate ideas of truth completely foreign to his present belief system.  As a once solid spiritual foundation begins to dissolve it  becomes extremely stressful for those holding structured religious beliefs.

Be not afraid dear ones, for there are no accidents at this point.  Know that you are always being guided, and are never alone. The Higher Self always brings forth what is needed when you are  ready. Learn to trust the process,  knowing that at this point  you are  right where you need to be, doing what you need to do, and doing a fine job of it.

Discouragement with its sense of failure are the manifestations of a consciousness filled with " I should.  I need to.  There is only one right way."--all facets of duality and separation.  It is time to cease the ever running inner dialog  of self criticism and judgement, allowing these beliefs to dissolve into the nothingness they are. There are no "shoulds" in higher dimensional energies, only love for every individual and their choices.

As spiritual students, you are at a point where you cannot evolve further until acknowledging  "self".   Spiritual students the world throughout time and now have struggled to find and understand what  God is.  Many  gods and concepts  are the result, many still being accepted as the only truth.  Most of you have come to know and accept that the Divine is within,  your own true nature and real SELF.  However,  at the same time, many believe their humanity to be something separate in the belief that "self" is simply ego and must be eliminated.  The "self" is SELF, but in the human state is conditioned by concepts and beliefs of separateness.  The "self" cannot be left out.

An absence of self-love has been falsely considered to be humility, but it is not.  It is the manifestation of separation consciousness.  Humility is an awareness of who you are and where any gifts you may have,  flow from.

Many look back on their lives, believing that  past actions or even present ones make them unworthy of love and find it impossible to love the person they believe themselves to be.  This is because they hold false concepts of what love is.  Loving self means acknowledging, accepting, and loving not only the Divine within, but also that part of you that is still learning--the  part that has made many mistakes and often seems to be a failure.  It is a journey of bringing together the inner child and the Divine Self.

There can no longer be a dwelling on "sins" of the past for  this simply serves to cement  energies of the past, all of which are illusory.  Remember, a person can only live out from their highest state of attained consciousness.  The things you may of done long ago, are not what you would do today.

The inner child is a term used for the accumulated energy of an immature and unawakened state of consciousness carried with and added to,  lifetime after lifetime.

Inner child work can be a powerful tool in learning to  love  "self".  Although this work is often considered  a psychological practice, it  actually goes much deeper.  The inner child is that innocent and trusting facet of you that has been rejected, disappointed, and hurt.  It is the unawakened you as a small child, your individuality in it's most innocent state.  As the experiences of the third dimension began in every lifetime,  you only knew and thus accumulated  the cellular memories of a child's defenses.

Most humans still carry some if not all the energy of wounds experienced in the child  consciousness along with the immature ways with which they attempted to address them.  As an adult, these  energies begin to manifest as the immature thoughts and actions that  pop up unexpectedly when you least expect them, usually in times of stress.  Most adults  usually ignore these feelings, not realizing that they are dismissing their inner child  as irrelevant and thus perpetuating the situation. This energy can only be cleared by you.  The child must be acknowledged, accepted, loved, guided, protected, etc. and it is time.

Honor what ever age your inner child may be at this time.  You will know through the types of inner dialogs you experience.  Speak gently to this part of yourself, telling it that from now on you are going to love and  protect it and  most importantly acknowledge it.   The inner child is the you who for no good  reason often feels hurt, angry, sad, or depressed and as an  immature child, afraid.   Be patient, knowing as with all children, the child is doing the best it knows at that moment and needs your support.

Many have  intellectual spiritual knowledge  (crown chakra), but until you embrace the whole of you acknowledging and accepting the child (heart chakra), there will  be struggles.  As you learn to accept,  listen to, support, and talk to this facet of your individuality without dismissing it as nothing,  it matures--first responding as a child, then an adolescent, and finally as an adult.  Finally you are able to, fully integrate this healed aspect and "self" becomes SELF.


Evolution on earth is a gradual  progression  toward remembering and accepting  the true identity of self and others through the experiences of many lifetimes lived in an energy of duality and separation while gradually evolving into a consciousness that learns from within instead of from without.  Know that regardless of appearances, in reality all is perfect, always has been, and always will be.

You have spent lifetimes trudging through a forest of dense and dark energy, trying to do your best every step of the way.  At a certain point you  began to see light filtering through the trees and  moved towards it, but after finally moving out and  into the bright light, you noticed that you had accumulated grass, sticks and all sorts of other debris along the way.  You are now in the process of discovering and removing the accumulated debris, some of which is deeply embedded.  This in turn will allow you for the first time to see yourselves and others clearly.

When truth  is new, there is often doubt and a desire to remain in what is  familiar.  However, once out of the forest and into the light, any glamour the old may still hold for you, soon disappears.    This is where most of you are now--a point at which you must cease looking  with  "forest vision".  You have emerged from  the forest and must leave behind the ways of the forest.  You now have light which will allow you to discover an infinity of ever present beauty and perfection previously unknown.

There are no accidents at this point in your journey.  All experiences are opportunities to examine your belief system without judgement or criticism.  It is time move beyond any self loathing or  other beliefs  that may suggest you are "less than".   You are ready to move beyond intellectual spiritual studies and into the  acceptance and  living of it. This means your spiritual journey must include honoring, appreciating, understanding, accepting, and loving  who you are--warts and all.

LOVE can never be governed by the standards of a society still enmeshed  in concepts of good and evil.  LOVE is  based in and flows out from  SELF.  Your awareness of this truth expands and grows with every unfoldment but  "self" cannot be excluded in the process.

Try to love the journey itself as well as all you meet along the way but most important is the knowing  of "self" to be SELF and that none  are more Divine than you in every moment.

We come in love to assist all in their evolutionary journey of remembering.

The world appears to be filled with intense images of both good and evil at this time--duality expressed at its best and highest.   This is because ever increasing energies of Light are greatly effecting the stability of anything and everything formed of old beliefs and concepts.  Rejoice dear ones,  for it is you doing the heavy lifting that is changing  world consciousness--the outer is always a reflection of the inner.

Slowly but surely, a consciousness of Oneness is emerging.  More and more people are being intuitively guided to  assist man, animals, plants, and the environment of Gaia herself in whatever ways seem to be needed.  An understanding of many within One, is gradually being born which starts on the unconscious level and then moves into conscious awareness.

Higher dimensional energies are serving to open the hearts of all who are ready, shifting them more deeply into the realization that every person, no matter the color of their skin or language they speak, as well as all life forms, are in and of the One substance and seek the same things according to their level of understanding.  These things are peace, harmony, abundance, joy-- all facets of unconditional love, the Divine essence of all that exists, ever present and always calling.

Often it is only an experience of some seeming disaster that brings this awareness to those still holding tightly to a sense of separation, choosing to live in white towers of self-righteousness and power, and who see themselves as separate and better than everyone around them.  When change comes for these people, rejoice not in their seeming "fall from grace" but in the realization that they too are  learning and evolving,  but doing it the "hard way".

Today's message is about love, a topic spoken of and discussed on all levels throughout the world.
A deep and truer understanding of the Divine nature of  Love is vital to spiritual  evolution.  Love is the activity of oneness and is the basis for everything that exists.  It is the glue that holds together all things and is interpreted and experienced according to the state of consciousness of the individual.

Example:   Love, the connecting energy between all things within the One Omnipresent Consciousness, when interpreted through un-evolved states of consciousness  will manifest outwardly as  war, rape, abuse, and all the experiences of duality and separation.  The One has never changed nor could it ever be less that what it is.  It is the state of the individual consciousness as well as consensus  consciousness that interprets and manifests how you see and experience the world.

A higher sense of love is beginning to awaken within the hearts of mankind.   Love, the connecting energy  between all living things is beginning to be experienced and acknowledged profoundly  more than  in  belief systems of the past.

Most of you have lifetimes  in which love was generally only thought of as something between a mother and child, or perhaps between friends or lovers and often with strings attached.  Love was more of a barter and almost never unconditional.  Often  there was little or no love in marriages which were simply contracts assuring convenience and safety for two countries, or families.  For those of poorer means, it often represented another pair of hands to do the work.

Women were more often than not, considered bargaining chips or simply chattels, a means to an end.  Love even in the human sense  rarely entered into the picture.  When romantic love did happen, it was frequently discouraged or even forbidden  if the union did not fulfill the concepts and beliefs of those in power, be it simple families or royalty.

There has been very little  understanding of the real nature of  Love except for the occasional mystic.  Concepts based in duality and separation have ruled the consciousness of mankind lifetime after lifetime, conditioning and interpreting love as well as everything else, in  very limited ways.

Love is beginning  to be recognized as much more than simple emotional  attachment. Over time those of a higher state of consciousness tried to reveal unconditional love through their words and actions,  but for the most part people were unable to embrace that level of consciousness.  Your inner work is birthing a new world consciousness  and mankind is rapidly attaining an ability to learn about and live Love as the universal and unconditional truth of being that it really is.

You have evolved and are now ready to accept and integrate the deeper truth of unconditional love as being all there is.  This must become an attained state of consciousness if you are to move into the higher dimensional energies emerging and available at this time  which means awareness and practice on your part.  You do not have to have fully attained this state of consciousness in order to move forward, but must have the honest intention to do so.  The higher dimensions are dimensions of Love, and cannot be entered still holding fast to a consciousness of separation with all its accompanying  judgement and criticism.


The necessity for unconditional love  occasionally  acts as a block for the spiritually ready individual unable to embrace the idea of having to love everyone.  When this happens it means there is a misunderstanding of what unconditional Love really is.   It is possible to have unconditional love even for those living at very dense levels of awareness  once it is  understood that unconditional love is not an acceptance of their actions nor a lowering  into their level of consciousness.

It is not  attraction to or acceptance of everyone and everything regardless of how much  havoc they may be causing and neither is it an emotional desire to be with the person or place or thing although that can be a part of it.  Unconditional Love  is recognition--the recognition of ever present Divinity within all things even when the object does not care a whit about it.


Unconditional love means every person or situation  you become aware of must be seen with new eyes,  which in turn trains the mind to interpret in new and higher ways.  Begin to visualize a diamond in the heart of every person you become aware of as you go about your day.  Make this diamond a  symbol  representing the person's innate Divinity even if you do not like or respect what they represent.  The news, the world, the things you hear about  or see on TV are all opportunities to practice  blessing the world through recognition.

There must come at some point, a realization of oneness in world consciousness if it is to evolve beyond duality and separation and you are Light workers making it happen.

Try and let go of judgement and criticism of appearances for fear, worry, and concern serves to give them a power they do not have and cements whatever illusory energy they do have.  This can be difficult for those of you used to actively fighting the negative issues of the world in your quest for change.

You are being asked now to take the next step which is a  letting go of resistance, and a moving into unconditional love.  Your mind will accept this after awhile although at first it will rebel, for it has been trained in other ways.


This never means you cannot sign a petition, or take some action you are being guided to take.  It does  mean  that your first action now becomes one of unconditional love which may or may not lead you to a next action.

Attaining this state of consciousness and the next step of your journey and you are ready.

Greetings dear ones.  We observe that all is proceeding according to schedule, and most of you are beginning to recognize and experience the new and powerful energies of transformation.  Everyone's experience may well be different so try not to compare yours with what you may read or hear regarding the spiritual experiences of another.   Every person is unique by virtue of having lived different experiences through many lifetimes, finally arriving at their present state of consciousness.  You are  clearing the residue of hundreds of lifetimes lived in ignorance and no one person is exactly the same as another.

Most of you are now beginning to see and experience the world from a higher dimensional viewpoint which is manifesting as new ways, forms, and ideas of those things you are already familiar with.  The reality (Divine Idea) of everything in the outer world  always remains present and infinite in Divine Consciousness.  Spiritual evolution allows you to interpret and manifest these Divine ideas on a new and higher levels.

An example could be how the three dimensional world views death.   Death means complete obliteration to those believing there is nothing beyond one lifetime, except the slight chance of a heaven or hell based on how "good" a person was.   Thus, death to them is  something to be feared and avoided at all costs.  Those of a more illumined consciousness, who realize there could never be real death, are somewhat free of this intense fear and anxiety.   There is always some sadness with parting, but none of the terror and resistance born of ignorance.   Death is recognized to be a transition, not an ending--a  part of everyone's evolutionary  journey on earth, often welcomed by those tired and ready to go home. The Divine Idea here is Omnipresence.  You, as expressions of the Divine,  always will be...place is of no importance.

Soon you begin to see changes within  governments and law for the consciousness of mankind is rapidly awakening and ready to reclaim personal powers ignorantly surrendered over lifetimes.  More and more people are beginning to realize that they are not powerless  and this change of the inner will in turn manifest as changes in the outer.

The continuous clearing of old energy is  not meant to go on forever, and  many of you are now moving into a time of creating.  Because you are beginning to accept that you are indeed powerful spiritual beings, your thoughts and words  are manifesting  more quickly.  As you now move into a more evolved state of consciousness, most of the old programming from  lifetimes of ignorance that served to block your ability to consciously manifest, has dissolved or is in the process of dissolving.

For thousands of years the mankind has for the most part been unaware of his true nature and thus a world consciousness of individual powerlessness  became the consensus belief.  Those in positions of dominance have always worked to convince the majority they had no power of their own and so must look to others (them) for their good.  The result has been a world of people ignorant of who they really were, believing, obeying, and  following the demands of the rich and powerful without question.  This will end when a majority awakens, serving to lift and open world consciousness to new and higher levels of awareness.

Arise dear ones, and remember who you are.  It is time to claim your Divine sonship,  being ever mindful of how you speak and think, for you are creators.

Note how some individuals who are experts in certain areas of medicine or science through intense study, research, and belief,  often discover these very issues manifesting in their own families or themselves.   Every billboard, ad, or announcement regarding some campaign to fight a disease or condition serves to  materialize  it more firmly in the belief system of all who read it and thus manifest more of it.

When an individual is enmeshed in the human belief system of duality and separation, their lives  reflect some good and some bad.   Painful life lessons are often a part of a soul's pre-birth contract in order to resolve some karmic issue or learn some needed lesson, but three dimensional experiences can also be  impersonal, simply  reflecting a state of consciousness that accepts two powers.

Man was not meant to slip so deeply into three dimensional density, but you are completing the hard work necessary in order to move beyond it and are doing a fine job.  A  job that required lifetimes of often painful experiences necessary for building courage and strength.  Remember this fact whenever you are tempted to believe yourself to be a failure in any way, for in reality there can be no failure, only learning experiences

It is difficult to move beyond  popular thought until truth becomes an attained state of consciousness at which point much of the three dimensional belief system begins to simply lose its relevance and power over you.   You see and hear the same things as everyone else, but you no longer react in the same way.

Those of you reading these messages are quickly moving into a consciousness able to discern  truth where the world sees discord and are beginning to instinctively recognize what is hype and promotion for the financial benefit of a few.  You are learning see the world with new eyes and  live out from  a higher awareness of what is going on around you.  Because of this, you are helping to shift world consciousness to new levels.

Look back a few years to your lives at an earlier time dear ones, and you will quickly realize how far you have come in very a short time.  Just a few years ago, you might of jumped on the band wagon of many popular three dimensional  beliefs,  those same beliefs you clearly see differently today.

You are awakening, and remembering who you are--coming to realize that you no longer  need to seek, beg, or plead from some  "pie in the sky" god for the good you have sought in vain for lifetime after lifetime.

Rejoice, for you have finally found IT where IT has always been-- within-- patiently and  lovingly awaiting your recognition.
