Weibel had above all placed emphasis in his exhibition concept on examining the problematic issues of totalitarian systems such as Fascism, Communist dictatorship or National Socialism and to present in critical terms his long considered views of Austria’s identity as a “country without qualities” (a reference to the title “Man Without Qualities” of the key Robert Musil novel). Austria had never enjoyed a conflict-free relationship to modernity, especially in the interwar years, when its representatives had been banished and exiled, and after the “Anschluss”, the incorporation of Austria into the Third Reich, Austria had denied and suppressed its pernicious role as a guilty party in the Holocaust. This project of negation of criminal involvement and an abysmal identity transfer to that of a victim had been only too gladly passed down to the present time and the problems blithely swept under the carpet. Peter Weibel has rebelled from his earliest youth against this public denial of an “expulsion of the intelligentsia from Austria” both in spectacular art events and performances as also in his theoretical writings and has remained an intellectual authority on contemporary political and topical social issues.
In the meantime we had also engaged an architect, since this exhibition was to be spread among three venues due to the enormous volume of art works covered. The choice fell on Manfred Wolff-Plottegg, who had congenial relations with Weibel in implementing exhibition projects from his youth through to the present. This background naturally meant that he was no easy case to deal with either, and he held with unrelenting firmness to each of his “Utopias,” whether the issue was a deconstruction of the Kuenstlerhaus roof, or pushing through his plan for the development of unconventional wall structures in steel for the Baroque halls of the Neue Galerie, in which he brought our restorer to the point of madness, or even his plan of filling the city with silage bales for use as an advertising medium. The conflict potential rose with the temperature in the course of an unusually hot summer. All holidays were cancelled and any of the usual divisions between the working day and the weekend, day, and night gradually vanished. Our eating habits changed – it became a joy to have the pizza service arrive somewhere around midnight bringing us our “lunch”; Red Bull and Bach-flower drops were used to keep up our concentration through the early hours of the day while reading and editing the galley proofs that were being set manually. Alexandra measured out the dimensions for the illustrations using a ruler, she cut and glued them for the layout that Weibel had specified.
Avant-gardes of the twentieth century fought against the (art) institutions in the name of each individual artist’s freedom – the freedom to overcome the limits of these institutions, to break free from them, flout obsolete standards and create the outrageous. Today people still like to criticize institutions, aiming at their disempowerment and abolition. Meanwhile, however, the meaning of this critique has changed completely. Today criticizing institutions serves only to conceal the fact that these mighty, normative institutions de facto no longer exist. Today’s art institutions are usually weak willed, have no money and are scarcely perceived by the wider public. They cannot and do not want any longer to set up binding aesthetic standards. They would rather chase after fashions spread by the media; they seek to be cool and hip to appeal to “young visitors.” The great, mighty museum director with indisputable power over his collection, or the art critic with a farreaching influence who sets directions and dictates his taste to the public: these are figures that belong to a long-gone age. Today’s criticism regarding cultural institutions can only be interpreted as a nostalgic invocation of this past epoch – an attempt to conceal the real weakness of today’s art institutions. Under these conditions the artist no longer has a chance to orientate himself according to existing art institutions, be it in the sense of adapting to the standards they have established, or in the sense of a revolution against these standards. Basically, the artist is left with but one possibility: to found an institution of his/her own, making themselves an institution. Certainly this way is much more cumbersome than the easier way of common criticism of institutions. Hence there are only very few artists who have been down this road consistently. And these artists deserve our admiration. Amongst these very few, we most assuredly find Peter Weibel. Weibel understood from early on that advanced art has no stable place in our society and that this place has yet to be created – on all levels of topical artistic practice. As an artist, if one does not choose to make oneself a curator, one is dependent on the curator. And when the artist wishes to assume the role of curator, his best move is to keep a museum space constantly available for himself. A space in which he or she can experiment with all kinds of exhibitions. Today’s artists cannot count on a binding comment on their work unless they become theoreticians in their own right and comment on their own work. They could also invite other theoreticians to write for a publication conceived by the artist, and then design and edit the book themselves. Ideally they would print it themselves as well. In this the artist would always be dependent on the technology continuously developing in art production and distribution. If they don’t develop the production on their own account. In this way they could avoid being dependent on using only the things other people had produced as a technological progress. This would mean the artists themselves must create and manage an institution, which would further develop artistic techniques. They must run this institution, employ people and have the means to pay them. So the artists have to ask themselves how they would not only passively reflect and criticize the economical, political and administrative aspects of their artistic practice, but also how they could actively design, organize and manage them on a daily basis. In other words: Once the artists stop to act as a decorator for the state, they have no choice but to become a state within a state, if they choose not just to cater for the art market.

Weibel’s art, however, is not limited to the creation of this image of artistic sovereignty. Beyond art institutions there is another dimension that increasingly determines today’s art world, i.e. the beholder. The avant-garde promised the artists absolute individual freedom regarding all their artistic decisions – the freedom not only to choose freely the theme of their work, but also to dispose freely of all artistic means, independent of all traditions, conventions and criteria of good taste or the mastership that still largely determined artistic creation before the rise of radical avant-garde at the beginning of the twentieth century. This newly promised freedom had a drug-like effect on the artists at first and created an unprecedented intoxication. This is why so many works arose from these early times which we still admire today. At the same time, however, one cannot deny that little has remained of this early euphoria. Today, artists no longer feel free – rather, they feel that their subjectivity has but little or no relevance for the art world. The reason for this new powerlessness on the part of the artist can be put down to the fact that, in the attempt to free themselves, at the same time the artists of the historical avant-garde committed a somewhat fatal act, and one whose importance they themselves did not notice in the beginning: they freed the beholder. The beholder was relieved of any of the criteria he used, or was supposed to use, for his judgment of a piece of art. The artist actively liberated himself from these criteria – and the beholder lost them. This made the beholder extremely insecure. He no longer knew how to react to the pieces of art that were presented to him. He felt helpless vis-à-vis the arbitrariness of the artist, utterly un-able to defend himself by means of a well-founded judgment. This initial insecurity reduced significantly with time. The further modern art developed, the more the beholder began both to cherish and relish the insecurity of freedom given to him by the artist. There are of course more beholders than artists and, according to democratic conditions, we all know that the minority must bend to the will of the majority. In earlier times the artist was able to reject the public’s judgment by asserting that they had not properly understood his work. The artist could call upon his mastership, the historical originality of his work and the strength of his inspiration, etc. Today, however, these justifications no longer apply, as the public feels totally free in their judgment. If they simply do not like something, they are not prepared to let themselves be convinced otherwise; the tables have turned. The avant-garde has directed the artist’s freedom against all of the public’s judgments. Now the freedom of the public’s judgment is directed against all reasoning and explanations on the part of the artist.
Even if our culture no longer believes in the criteria of taste, it certainly believes in knowledge and in technology. Art’s liberation from the beholder’s taste can only happen in terms of a mechanization of art. Or, in other words, its re-mechanization. Art was always, in the first place, a matter of technique. Only the historical avant-garde discredited and then abolished art production’s old techniques. Malevich’s Black Square and Duchamp’s Ready-mades introduced an age of the de-mechanization of art. It was particularly at this point that artists lost their cultural privilege regarding the beholder. If an artistic decision is totally free to declare an object or a random form a work of art, then the beholder must also be free not to accept this decision. Everything becomes a question of personal or individual taste. If the artist’s taste is contrary to the beholder’s taste then, as we all know, the loser is the artist. The avant-garde was an attempt to liberate art by de-mechanizing it, by liberating it from capability and knowledge, by equalizing the act of artistic creation with aesthetic judgment. Today, this de-mechanization of art, which was carried out by the historical avant-garde, increasingly presents itself as the preparation for a new phase of its radical re-mechanization. The avantgarde abolished old techniques such as drawing, painting and sculpture – or relativized them in their meaning. However, after a phase of being freed from technology, the re-mechanization of art has begun. It started with the use of new digital techniques of image production and distribution. The artist has again become a technician, a specialist and a producer, thereby once again establishing cultural distance between himself and the beholder. Peter Weibel had an early understanding of the opportunity offered by the new determination of arts and he seized it. Many artists and theorists have preached the return of art to technology and knowledge in the times of the Post-modernism of the 1970s and 1980s. However, this almost always implied some kind of ironic return to traditional artistic techniques. One wanted to protect oneself from the all too mighty mass media and define other, alternative spaces. For the same reason others use to legitimate their farewell from the avant-garde, as Weibel connects to the avant-garde’s traditions. The opportunity and even the need to restructure the avant-garde program, results for Weibel from the fact that art has definitely left behind its traditionally closed rooms and must act amidst today’s technological, medialized world. Hence the avant-garde was right in letting go of traditional art techniques, directing the view of the beholder onto the new technical world – even with a critical purpose. Today, however, it is widely pronounced that art should give up its critical, elitist, avant-gardist attitude and should be easy to digest. In short: that art, as soon as it starts to be produced in the context of and by using mass-media procedures, should be obliged to adapt aesthetically to the laws of mass-media dissemination too.
Here, the avant-garde is not dismissed as obsolete but rather transcended by means of a re-mechanization of art and continued in its critical impetus. The repertoire of images circulating in mass media networks is very limited. Not only so-called images of the other, but also images created by science, interactive images, purely subjective images, let alone abstract images, usually have no chance of entering large mass-media networks. It is, however, just these denied, excluded images that Weibel works with. Images which can be created using technical media and are hence indeed technically compatible with the networks of massmedia dissemination. At the same time, they display an aesthetic incompatibility with these networks. In this sense Weibel’s artistic practice is a direct continuation of the artistic practice of the historical avant-garde under the conditions of its technical and medial topicality. This would imply a continuation of the critical discussion of mimetic illusion.

This insight, however, would only worry an engineer, not an artist. Weibel is very well informed about the limits of logic, since he has seriously and systematically researched the field. Artists like to use computer programming and simulation because they like to demonstrate how the system loses its own systematic, how strict logic leads to paradoxes and how an ambivalence is created by an obsessive search for unambiguousness. Art is indeed interested in system, structure and program, but mainly where they lead themselves ad absurdum. It is exactly in this drift toward the absurd that it becomes clear how the image of thinking differs from thinking itself and that the living cannot easily be mimetically duplicated. Today’s artists, working with communicative and “intelligent” media, are more interested in the blind alleys, disturbances and absurdities of media communication than in its acquisitions. This is why the re-mechanization of art is certainly not just about naive enthusiasm or worship of technology. On the contrary: it allows not only an ideological claim of the limits of technology but also their technical analyses. But it is not mere pleasure in chaos that makes artists interested in the dysfunctional, in the deceptive element of computer-controlled and communicative processes. It is instead a systematic and critical analysis of mimetic procedure by means of art. This is a task modern art has imposed on itself and in the meantime it has become tradition. Except that today it is the mimesis of thinking, not reality. The analytical, critical dimension of Weibel’s occupation with the operational logic of today’s computer-controlled and communication systems, which he pursues in the context of his work at ZKM Karlsruhe, is already detectable in his early works dealing with the logic of mass media and everyday communication. These earlier art works can be seen mainly as examples of the artist’s critical occupation with the conventions of today’s media culture. These works often have a clear political dimension. They frequently refer to the chances as well as to the shortcomings and absurdities of today’s media world. However, mostly these works display a very specific sense of humor. As we all know, Soren Kierkegaard drew a strict line between irony and humor. For Kierkegaard, irony was the manifestation of a seemingly endless subjectivity aiming for a triumph over the finite character of things. Humor was for him the result of this subjectivity’s insight about its own finiteness.

Don’t worry, this is not an attempt to trace family circumstances or events way back in Odessa. The making of spiteful allegations is not our purpose either but rather to take a leap in the dark and to attempt an investigation of one of the most lucid creative contributions to Austrian art since 1945 – the work of Peter Weibel. Lügt (lies) was the message written on a board the artist held up beneath the sign of a police station in 1971. Let us forget for a moment that it is above all federal institutions, which through their practice contribute in no way at all to the good of certain groups of people. Indeed, these institutional inventions have set themselves objectives such as the freedom of the individual or social progress, or simply, the welfare of mankind, yet, there are also some quite contrary side effects, extending as far as the blatant discrimination for some of the so-called “supported.” If this were not the case, in our representational democracies we would be obliged to assume that the police are ultimately the tool of the representatives of the people (politicians). They again, are elected by the people (us), representing it (us). They are the people (us). So if the policeman lies, this is first of all an incident, maybe resulting from a certain specific personality structure. For instance because the policeman as an individual is given too much personal power which as a consequence he might abuse to the detriment of other individuals. Lies are told, however, also by the institution, the state, the representatives of the people, by the people themselves – and finally by us. In this paradoxical situation you too, dear reader, are lying every bit as much as the author of these lines – and consequently Weibel too. We know what the artist is on about and what he is denouncing, at the same time, however, we understand the limits of linguistic possibilities. Thus in striving for freedom and knowledge, we are forced to contrast the state lie with our own lie, whilst the notion is relativized as soon as the viewpoint changes. In the most radical moment of anti-art, in the 1960’s, avant-garde artists – building their work on the heritage of Dada, Surrealism and Constructivism – were able to shatter the foundations of bourgeois society, and thereby create fear. The traditional self-conception of art at that time was after all based on the assumption that art per se was a part of bourgeois society and thus part of its own system of rule and power. So if art crosses the divide to become an expression of both cultural and political rebellion, its demand for truth will change. For its “counterpart” this becomes a lie that must be fought against. Whilst for the avant-garde, art, now transformed into a weapon, will reveal the lie of the bourgeois capitalist society and hence of the federal power. So we should look at Peter Weibel’s practice with regard to this field of conflict. Seemingly remote sources from anarchism to scientific-theoretical models were suddenly applied in order to help art to get out, to transform, helping it to new relevance.

Polizei lügt (police lie) is one of a series of actions that was documented photographically. Weibel changed the script on public notices. Oberlandesgericht became Oberschandesgericht (Higher Regional Court became Higher Disgrace Court), and Rechtsanwalt became Rechtsgewalt (attorney at law became violence of the law). This “scriptual terrorism” came into existence simply through holding the appropriate letters at the corresponding positions in the word. These interventions were a more direct invasion of public space than the graffiti being created at this time in New York City. As a potential for the denotation of an actual content, a warning, a revolt against state institutions, these “attacks” create feelings of insecurity. The graffiti by contrast no longer contains any direct message, for they have internalized the message and have been radicalized in their formal qualities. “Being neither denotation nor con-notation, they evade the principle of nomenclature and break as empty signifiers into the sphere of the fulfilled signs of the city, which is dissolved in turn by their pure presence.”2 Thus graffiti represent a variation – derived from the sub-culture – on linguistic criticism. Weibel’s series were titled attacks and still speak the language of the protest movement: do it! It also represents a form of subversive poetic statement, reducing content to its opposite through linguistic intervention, while plumbing the limitations of what language in fact can do. Weibel has himself studied and done academic work on the issue of philosophy as criticism of language, culminating in the formal thinking of the mathematician Kurt Gödel. Gödel has provided the quasi salvation of the “liar” paradox in his statement “I cannot be proved.” If Nietzsche took God from us, then Gödel would seem to have robbed us of ourselves. Because where are we if we cannot be proved or demonstrated? There, perhaps, where God is... A connection between linguistic skepticism and individual social rebellion was developed still further in the protest movement of the 1960’s of which Weibel was a part. This connection provides a basic framework, in which the content and socially critical expressions within Weibel’s art can be developed. He did this in the mid 1960’s in literature and as an extension from this into the fine arts. He would not be Weibel if he had not also created a theoretical foundation for his artistic actions. He provides coordinates for the clarification of his procedure in his Sub-geschichte der Literatur (A Sub-History of Literature).3 Here we learn that the official history of literature is not “a history of human invention through, with, and in language” but “rather a collection of felicities and self-help.” Thus no basic or social change is possible without bringing about a change in the formal structure. The hero, in content that is, is not an adequate figure however when presented in traditional costume. The Russian linguist Roman Jakobson provided a formulation of this development in 1921, by describing the poetic procedure as the “sole hero” of literature. The formulation of a sub-history, such as that of the avant-garde, comprises in itself a social-political dimension, precisely analogous to the content which it reports in its special cases.

Weibel’s early experiments began in 1964, downwind of the Vienna Group that had begun to assemble in the 1950’s. Direct work was done by this movement during the 1950’s and 1960’s as a sort of continuation, in the most radical manner possible, of the results achieved by the historical avant-garde (Dada, Futurism, Surrealism, Constructivism u.s.f.). Vienna was by no means ahead of the times in this decade – it was provincial, traditional and marked with the brown striations of a Nazi past. Neo-avant-gardist movements such as the Vienna Group had an absolutely unsettling character; the conviction that the transformation of bourgeois aesthetics would of necessity go hand in hand with the transformation of bourgeois society was here understood as a matter of course. Criticism of both the state and of reality by means of a criticism of language contributed on the one hand to an overstepping of the aesthetic consensus of the times and on the other hand to the transgression of genre frontiers. In anticipation of the “linguistic turn,” the artists expanded into other media such as photography and film, and, even more radical forms of artistic practice such as happenings, Concept Art, and actions. In other words, change-related thinking was by no means solely restricted to language and the arts, and the borderline between art and life was shifting in consequence. The Eight–Points–Proclamation of the Poetic Act, written in 1953 by H.C. Artmann, acts here to a certain extent as godfather.4 The expansion of the definition of language first took place through the inclusion of sounds and words, but continued with another phase of development that included other materials as well, up to the point where the poet could get by without using any kind of verbal language whatsoever. The visual dimension of the written text was rapidly overcome by Weibel as well, whose own work developed along the lines of action texts, motion poems, photo poems, object poems, process poems, and, as a concluding sort of gesture, the radical use of one’s own body. In works such as raum der sprache – skulptur mit angeschlossenem organismus (space of speech – sculpture with a connected living organism) Weibel had his own tongue set in a block of concrete. The point that is articulated in this gesture ranges from general speechlessness to the achievement of a bodily and social effect on people through the use of speech. What else can it be but a lack of freedom, after all, when the letter of the law is interpreted by a judge? What is possible for a judge, in setting his organ of speech in motion, is altogether impossible for the person whose tongue is sealed into a wall of concrete and marked by bodily repression.

Herbert Marcuse spontaneously offers a helping hand here: “Only when art remains negative is it in a position to negate existing reality itself.” And he continues: “Only authentic art is negative and this in the sense that it refuses to obey the existing reality, with its language, its order, its conventions and in its images. (...) To this extent art provides a representation of a free society and of closer human relationships. But art cannot go beyond this.” During the student revolts of the 1960’s, artists in a wide range of fields argued about the commitment of art within the context of the revolutionary process. There was relatively little to hear about these ideas in this respect in Austria, however. The work of the Viennese Actionists (e.g. Kunst und Revolution / Art and Revolution, 1968) represented one of the few contributions to this. Weibel, who was to some extent an active participant in Viennese Actionism and provided theoretical support for it, was once again the exception, however, for no other significant artistic work of Austrian origin provided such thoroughly committed contributions to these various processes. Michail Bakunin should be permitted to have a word here as well. For him, positive means reactionary, an acceptance of the status quo and thus ultimately a sort of quietness. Negativity is for Bakunin, as he wrote in 1842 in his essay Die Reaktion in Deutschland (Reaction in Germany), the democratic principle, which in his day represented the negation of an existing reality, and indeed ultimately represented a sort of movement. He argues from this that the negative alone has the right to existence, closing with the celebrated words: “The lust to destroy is also a creative lust!”6 This sentence has had a great influence of course in artistic and intellectual circles through to the present day. The intensive desire for change in the midst of an unbearable reality sounds like a trumpet call for all avant-garde demands and manifestos. This same phrase applies to the work of Dada, through Surrealism, and even the Viennese Actionists, just as it is to be encountered in linguistic criticism of that time, in its most radical and brutal formulations. In short, Bakunin’s sentence is the legitimizing basis for all such antipositions, and not just in art.
