Language, with its different recognizable sounds, has opened up to humanity the possibility of asking questions, telling stories, and participating in dialogue. Language has allowed the emergence of unknown entities in animal societies: numbers, gods, laws, works of art, calendars, the technological adventure, and the entire cultural universe. I will designate here by the term “ideas” those complex forms that appear, reproduce themselves, and evolve only in the world of culture, in the space of signification opened up by language. Language has allowed human communities, as compared to hives, herds and packs, to make a leap of collective intelligence because language creates a stronger and more supple link of competitive cooperation than what insects or monkeys have in their respective communities. In putting the idea at the center of my model, I have chosen an approach to human collective intelligence that radically distinguishes it from the collective intelligence of other animal societies. From this perspective, language represents the limit or threshold beyond which ecosystems of ideas are constituted. These are like spiritual hypertexts living in symbiosis with the societies of talking primates we humans form. These ecosystems of ideas grow more complex, die out, diversify, or combine in such a way as to lead those societies that cultivate them down, the in part undetermined, road of cultural evolution. Teilhard de Chardin coined the term “Noosphere” to describe the world ecosystem of all the ideas which globalization and the development of the means of communication, whose culmination we see in cyberspace, have only begun to put at our fingertips. Human communities can survive only by maintaining cultures, that is, semi-closed collective intelligences conducive to the breeding (reproduction and selection) of ideas. An ethical person, a corporation, an institution, a nation, a religion, a political party, a science, a virtual community or a tribe cultivates—nolens volens—ecosystems of ideas. In the course of its existence, a culture explores a viable evolutionary direction for its ideas. Our mental representations give ideas their forms. In a way, representations are the face, or the mask, of ideas. Representations can be of all kinds; their variety is in theory unlimited : e.g. the images of our perceptions, such as those created by human works of art, music, symbols, and the structures of highly complex relations that have been constructed by means of language and many other sign systems. Our intentions are the souls of ideas: the movement which animates the face. Intentions direct the mental representations toward particular destinations, or particular targets. They entrust ideas with a goal, which can be quite near, or even very far away, aiming at almost inaccessible horizons. We can think of intentions as the abstract structure of emotions, in other words, as vectors endowed with a force (intensity) and a direction (the “nature” of the emotion). Representations must be distinguished from emotions because the same representation, depending on the circumstances, can serve as a face for very different emotions.
