In October this year a former drone operator started talking about the psychological consequences of his work. He described the situation of being behind the screens in the air-conditioned containers at a US air force base in the Nevada desert. Since then several news stories about cases of PTSD and anxiety among drone operators have emerged, questioning the presumed benefits of using drones in war, which governments and military persuasively have been advocating for. In 2011 Air Force psychologists conducted a mental-health survey of 600 combat drone operators. 42% of the operators reported moderate to high stress levels, and 20% reported emotional exhaustion or burnout. Another study revealed that drone operators suffer from the same levels of depression, anxiety, PTSD, alcohol abuse and suicidal tendencies as traditional combat pilots (Power(2013)). The psychologists ascribe these psychological effects of the work of drone operators to “existential conflict”. The operators don’t train with a unit: they are pushing buttons and guiding a missile at a target that they follow through a live-feed on a screen, transmitted from the camera on the drone. They don’t put their own lives in danger; there is no tangible combat with the enemy, no anchoring in the reality of war - only the surveillance and the killing. At night they go home to sleep in their own bed (Owen(2013)).

How do we perceive the life circumstances of other people, when they are mediated through moving images displayed on a screen? Does the fact that the operator suffers the same psychological consequences as the soldier on the battleground suggest that it essentially doesn’t make a difference whether the killing of the enemy occurs locally or thousands of miles away, transmitted from the drone camera to a high resolution screen? By means of looking at the human consequences of drone warfare, is it possible to investigate our perceptions of others on a more general level, through affective and cognitive processes taking place when interacting with them through a screen?
Media archaeologists talk of the “bad ancestry” of certain media objects, pointing to their roots of origin. Were the technologies originally developed for the entertainment of people or for the surveillance of them? For military purposes or for personal use? Can these borders even be drawn up so distinctly? The story of the 20th century is inseparable from evolving cinema techniques – from telescopic viewfinders atop rifles to sophisticated cybernetic cameras, says Paul Virilio, determining the longstanding intimate relationship between war and cinema (Hussein(2013)).

Through this research I am trying to investigate this relation between the filmic qualities of the drones’ visual field and the cognitive and pre-cognitive reactions to the transmitted material - both from the viewpoint of the people operating the drones, and of the public confronted with the online/news footage of this new warfare at a distance. Drone footage is not cinema in any common sense of the term, but it is nevertheless moving image, captured by a camera and viewed on a screen. Drone footage thus possesses “filmic qualities”, which may prove valuable in examining the complexity of drone warfare. When watching moving images we form relations to what/who is represented on the screen, both through cognitive recognitions as well as affects and bodily reactions. Is it possible to transfer this way of analyzing film to the viewing of video footage of the drone? It becomes evident that it is not so easy to desensitize this looking as, for example, Dave Grossman (a colonel in the military arguing for the correlation between distance and the “ease” of killing) wishes it to be, when we take into consideration the psychological ramifications of the work of the drone operators (Hussein(2013)). In order to understand the array of implications of the use of real-time video transmission in modern warfare it is important to bring back the human reaction when we look at visual representation of others.

Looking at drone attack videos on Youtube I felt shocked, numbed and distanced from what I saw – the soundless birds-eye vision following the infrared dots, escalating in an equally soundless explosion, as if almost shaking the screen. How should I process these visual testimonies of the direction, in which media technology advancements are taking our societies? It made me wonder how we can redefine our relationship to viewing traumatic or violent visual material in the information society. In this sense how can we determine the importance of the psychological processes of viewing and relating in a sensible way to this material?
Screen technology increasingly inhabits our lives and we interact through it. Has this changed our perception of interacting with others? Does this disembodied interaction change our sense of empathy towards the other person? My hope is to point to the importance of creating a discourse around these subject matters, fostered through an awareness of the media form, a focus on the importance of sound structuring the image, the absence of the human body through the mediated interaction, and the possibility of forming an empathetic relationship, which we are able to build by interacting through affective responses with other people, even though this meeting is mediated through a screen. With this research I am also hoping to uncover how my explorations into this subject matter has opened up an approach for me to further understand and conduct artistic research as a method for art-making.

Drones, or UAV’s, are unmanned aircrafts that are remotely controlled by operators, who can surveil the geographical area below the drone, which is being captured by it’s built-in cameras (for technical specifications see Valdes:2012) and transmitted live to the screen of the operator. In some cases the drones also carry missiles that the operators can direct at a target (Valdes(2012)).

It seems that in the current discourse about drones (for both commercial, private and military use) is permeated with equal amounts of fascination and fear, as the public has to deal with the drastically developing technologies and uses of drones in our daily lives and in military operations abroad (Obama has ordered five times as many drone strikes in his first term as Bush did in his 8 years in office (Owen(2013))). Huge amounts of money are put into development and research of drone use, spanning widely from “delivery drones”, affordable “toy drones” and drone swarms to extensive, ambitious inventions for military use. It is specifically in regards to the military and secret surveillance where drones are being developed that many people can’t help but imagine a looming, Orwellian technological dystopia. And in all fairness the drones used in warfare do have quite a sinister appearance; like some breed of artificial creatures that, with their grey, eyeless noses, seem to have evolved in a lightless, gloomy environment. Their appearance and function is simply quite unsettling .
The hope for developing these new technologies is to eventually be able to remove more ground forces and replace them with unmanned technology systems (Nakashima, Whitlock(2011)). This is also the argument used by government officials and the military, the rhetoric being that they do work; they save lives of soldiers, is a good alternative to ground operations as they strike more precisely, and cause next to no civil casualties. Opponents however argue that they violate international law, create more enemies of the occupying power than what they eliminate, cause much more civil casualties than official reports state, cause severe psychological conditions for people living in drone-surveilled areas and, as mentioned in the introduction, cause psychological problems for the people operating the drones from afar (Hussein(2013)). I will not delve too deeply into the political and technical aspects of the drones used in war, as this has been eloquently covered in media and scientific reports, but turn towards the media technology of drones, analyzing the relationship between air warfare and cinema.

Why can it be useful to look at media objects in a historical context? On a very basic level it matters to put the media objects that shape our current reality, the way we experience life, into a time context. It roots us in our perception of our current situation, and the speed with which the technologies that we use develop. It can foster a better understanding of how technologies shape our current situation, or how we shape our current situation by developing certain aspects of technology while abandoning others.
When I went to the Technical Museum in Berlin I encountered a small installation of a taxidermy pigeon hanging in a glass cabinet together with some outdated photographical surveillance equipment. Around it’s neck an analogue still camera was mounted. This was a historical account of how aerial surveillance technology has developed. I wondered why the museum, with its extensive collection of military aircrafts didn’t devote more attention to this timely topic. The history of modern military surveillance begins with photography (Manovich(1995)). In 1882 unmanned photo balloons were used to gain overview of enemy territories, and in 1907 pigeon photography was invented in Germany to be used in the 1st and 2nd world wars, both by Germany and the United States (Deutsches Technikmuseum(2007)).
However Radar was developed in the mid 30’s and soon became the major surveillance technology during WW2, introducing the concept of real-time screen-based surveillance, and thus eliminating the inherent delay that made photo-surveillance inefficient. According to Manovich this development brought along a new type of screen that differentiated itself from photography and film. These two representational forms freeze the photographed in time, whereas the new type of screen (a predecessor for video monitors, tv, computer screen and instrument display – in short, moving images that implements live transmission) relies on continuous updating in real-time. The radar screen changes while tracking the referent, constituting a closer genealogical relationship to audio waves than the photographical image.
Manovich’s article, An Archaeology of a Computer Screen from 1995, may today seem a bit outdated, in regards to its fascination with the Virtual Reality screen. However, it provides some useful tools when looking at the genealogy of the screen, and what Matthew Fuller in a 2013 talk about Kittler has termed “bad ancestry” of certain media objects (Fuller(2013)). Manovich traces this genealogy back to the painting , which is followed by the dynamic screen, introducing film, television, and video, where images can be displayed as moving over time. This brings in a certain “viewing regime”, where the viewer is asked to suspend disbelief and identify with what the image displays – it tries to focus our attention within the framework of the screen. Of course with this “aggressive” screen, the degree to which it is required of the viewer to submit to the illusion of the represented, depends on the context (e.g. whether it is in a dark cinema or in front of a TV where people often interact while watching). This viewing regime has changed with the computer, the interactive screen, where the viewer has control over what he wants to view, navigating between different windows and programs simultaneously. Where the emergence of the cinema screen is well known and indisputably developed for the entertainment of people, Manovich turns our attention to the genealogy of the computer screen. He juxtaposes its history and emergence to that of the cinema screen, claiming, that even though it appeared in the middle of the 20th century it was not introduced into the public realm until much later. The computer was (mostly) developed and used by military, specifically in regards to surveillance. This is the screen of real time. Radar became a superior way of gathering information about enemy locations, and the computer (along with other key principles and technologies) partly developed to provide an effective way to process and display this information. According to Manovich modern human-computer interface owe their existence to military research (For a more detailed description of this early development see Manovich(1995), Pp.5-6).

So what becomes the point of focus here is the media objects themselves and not what passes through them. Media archaeologists are interested in what the origins of media can tell us about our current situation – in Friedrich Kittler’s words the way they “determine our situation”. It is only the media that can see what it becomes, not their inventors, according to Fuller. In that way Kittler is opposing the McLuhan idea that media are extensions of man saying that:” Media are not pseudopods for extending the human body. They follow the logic of escalation that leaves a written history behind it”(Kittler(1985)). With the increasingly greater presence of media objects, and the way these objects seamlessly are able to merge themselves into our lives, it becomes important to “break the illusion of timelessness” as Erkki Huhtamo requests in his article “Screen Tests: Why Do We Need an Archaeology of the Screen?” (Huhtamo (2012)). My aim in terms of looking at drone technology through a media archaeological lens is to attempt to deconstruct this “illusion of timelessness”, to use it as a tool for thinking about how we can foster a better awareness of the complexities of the use of drones in modern warfare, by considering the media technology behind them. The aim is to think of how to change focus from the political aspect of using these technologies and consider the human reactions to the turns and roles certain media forms have taken in our societies. What is important in regards to the media technologies used in drone warfare is to think about where these technologies have emerged from, and how one can, by looking at these origins, investigate our reactions and interactions with these new, sometimes obscure or not-yet-defined, media forms that are so rapidly changing essential factors in our society.
While Manovich juxtaposes the viewing regime of the real-time screen of the computer and the cinema screen, it might be useful to consider the act of looking from another angle when dealing with the real-time screen of the drone. Paul Virilio has made the connection between war and cinema, looking at the relationship between act of viewing (surveilling) and power. He traces the camera’s systematic role in the military context of the 20th century in his work “War and Cinema – the Logistics of Perception”. He points out that “…For men at war, the function of the weapon is the function of the eye” (Virilio(1989), Pp.20). He states that while the image was originally developed as a system of information and amusement, it is most often utilized as systems of observation and control. From the emergence of military photography in the American Civil War, over telescopic viewfinders on rifles, to a strategy of global vision with spy-satellites, drones etc., making “real-time warfare” possible on a distance. One may wonder if Virilio ever imagined that his observations would become as integral a part of modern warfare as they have become within the last 10 years, with the emergence of remote airbases and drone operations.

As the book’s title indicates, he is interested in the relationship between looking and the act of taking aim (killing), stating that:” The act of taking aim is a geometrification of looking, a way of technically aligning ocular perception along an imaginary axis that used to be known in French as "the faith line" … to denote the ideal alignment of a look, which starting from the eye, passed through a peep-hole and the sights and on to the target object" (Virilio(1989)Pp.3). Hereby he reminds us of the shared genealogical origin of the image and the tools of war. With his theories of speed and politics he also introduces the idea of the shift in focus from a politics of space to a politics of time, where whoever is in control of instant information, communication and surveillance is in power. It is the society with access to information technologies and who understands the power of controlling and utilizing image technologies moving in time (real-time in the case of surveillance) who are in power. The drone technology becomes a figurative and literal representation of this power structure, where the image and possessing the best technology for using this image becomes the most efficient and overruling weapon. Of course, much can be said about the power relations and inequalities of this type of warfare as an unequal exchange, pointing more towards policing action than warfare, but that is not the main focus of this research. In order to make a turn towards the main subject of the work, the human consequences of drone warfare, it can be useful to approach the subject from another cinematic reading – that of the viewer.

In “War and Cinema” Virilio is quoting Merleau-Ponty: “The problem of knowing who is the subject of the state and war will be of exactly the same kind as the problem of knowing who is the subject of perception” and goes on to say that “however it is not human observers or military analysts themselves who will have this ubiquitous and surgically precise vision: rather, a ‘sight machine’ aboard an intelligent satellite will automate perception of enemy territory in the finest detail, helping the missile’s ‘expert system’ to reach its decision at the speed of electronic circuitry”. (Virilio Pp. 2(1989)). For Virilio technological advancements will ultimately create, not a simulation as Baudrillard states, but a substitution of reality, a virtual reality that becomes more powerful than the actual human reality. In this new virtual reality the image of real time becomes the most powerful weapon as it, through the acceleration of our media environment, becomes too quick for human perception and thus these images can provide a strategic advantage. In Virilios theories about the advancement of image-based technologies the human has thus become obsolete.

To Virilio the loss of the human in the contemporary world, under the influence of always accelerating technologies, will become the main problem of our society. He mourns the loss of “the phenomenological dimension that privileged lived experience”, explaining that the new forms of technologies create an abstract, virtual realm, which replaces that of the phenomenological, lived experience. But Virilio could not in 1989 predict the situation of a drone war, one that is so close to his technological dystopia in all other senses, where technology creates all-encompassing possibilities for killing and surveilling on a distance. But there are people involved in this act of looking, and the people behind the screens perceive what they transmit – and they’re getting PTSD, burnout and anxiety from this looking.

David Grossman, a former lieutenant, psychologist and scholar in military research, has written about psychological consequences of killing in combat. Grossman writes in his book “On Killing”, “I have not found a single instance of individuals who have refused to kill the enemy under these circumstances, nor have I found a singe instance of psychiatric trauma associated with this type of killing” (Hussein(2013)). Surely the impact of killing in combat on ground is something fundamentally different and much more traumatizing than sitting behind a screen and directing missiles at targets through a live-feed video representation. And surely it is easier to order these soldiers to kill without having to deal with “refusing”, or the messiness of combat and physical damage. But when Brandon Bryant, who was one of the first and most outspoken drone operators to talk about his experiences, tells his version of the work he was doing in those air-conditioned containers, it becomes evident that the work of killing for the drone operator is by no means “easy”, nor is it like shooting in a video game (which some critics have pointed a phenomenological resemblance to). In his powerful interview with the magazine GQ he revealed the haunting realities of a job that are much more horrifying than any video game could be. He describes how he would attack, and then being ordered to linger above the site for hours on end watching the bloody consequences unfold. The funeral for the killed, or the cleaning up of body parts. Or he would be a birds-eye observer of other haunting scenarios in the reality of a war-ridden country, not being able to intervene in the atrocities he saw. Mostly, though, his work would just be an endless loop of watching and waiting for orders, or following possible targets, gaining an intimate and voyeuristic view into the mundane, human aspects of their lives. Another factor that played into his diagnosis of PTSD was the fact that the operators were more or less on their own dealing with their role in the war (unlike soldiers that live together in a camp building a kinship); “I kind of finished the night numb…Then you just go home. No one talked about it. No one talked about how they felt after anything. It was like an unspoken agreement that you wouldn’t talk about your experiences.” (Power(2013)). He tells about an episode where he saw a man, whose leg he had just shot off, bleed to death, through the infrared camera of the drone, in a soundless moment where all time stood still for him, while the man slowly turned the same color as the ground he was laying on. Or another where, in a swift moment before firing a missile, he thought he saw a child running right into his aim, before blowing up the scene in an infrared burst of light (Power(2013)).

Several videos of drone attacks can be found online. Together with the eyewitness accounts from Bryant and other operators, they give an insight into the “viewing regime” of the drones and the, now rather obvious, implications they have on the viewer. In the next paragraphs this relationship between the footage that is transmitted on screen by the drone camera is examined from two angles: That of the drone operator, shot in real time and with the direct interaction with the death of the enemy, and that of the viewer of these recorded testimonies, which can be found on Youtube.

Bryant’s testimony of the psychological consequences of his work suggests that, in order to understand the complexity of drone warfare in its totality, we need to look beyond the technical as well as the political musings on the phenomenon of the drone. In the light of this it becomes clear that Virilio’s premonitions of a humanless war machine, a catalyst for powerful real-time images which are taking over the reality of real human experience, does not adequately describe this very peculiar turn that the contemporary relationship between war and the moving image has taken, with the use of drones in modern society. Bryant reminds us in a way that even though these technological advancements and distancing of the human body in the combat situation were meant to desensitize the act of killing, to make it clean and effective, it is nearly impossible to shut out cognitive and affective reactions to the visual material that is being represented on the screens.
Growing up in a visual media culture, a culture of war images, but also of gaming and movies, one must assume that the people that work as drone operators are accustomed to processing and digesting visual imagery – also of the violent kind. But it is not the presumed resemblance with strategic video games or the like that concern most critics of drones. The operators know very well that this is real life combat, and, even though they are the ones firing, they are still following commands from an extensive chain of lawyers and top-commanders. I would argue that working as a drone operator is working in a field where, when perceiving visual imagery, affective responses are left in an ambiguous state, and where the boundary of the screen, between the observer and the observed, is not as distanced as is suggested by military proponents of drone warfare. It is worth mentioning the fact that the resemblance of this footage to visual imagery encountered in media culture is quite similar, but put in a completely different context. One where the operators can view their destruction in high resolution, where the live-feed shows all that video games don’t: The human, everyday activities of the people living under the cameras. It is this truly weird combination of silently partaking in people’s lives on the other side of the planet, witnessing real-time footage of the atrocities of war while partaking in (and being aware of partaking in) this reality, together with the very asymmetry and distancing of the drone technology, that is essential to the perception of the drone footage.

In order to deal with human perception of visual imagery (especially of the traumatic kind) it can be useful to look at theory exploring affect and emotions when looking at images. Investigating affective responses seems to be a growing tendency within media-, literary- and art theory as a means of understanding our information – and image-based culture. It is the conception that there is more to the human reaction to ‘sensorial inputs’ than what can be read through semiotics, that there are pre-cognitive responses, which are not easily defined or “measurable”. Affect theory, in terms of understanding cultural effects of art/media inputs, is a way to understand how these inputs actually effect us on a biological level, e.g. through rising pulse, neurological patterns and galvanic skin response. These theories go beyond a formalist reading of the sensorial input and try to uncover how the body “bears information” and reacts immediately and pre-cognitively to such input. This information comes before any understanding that we receive from reading the content in a cultural context of signs and pre-conceived knowledge. What is important to theorists such as Brian Massumi is to highlight the fact that there is potential for some kind of “raw” experience in humans, when encountering a sensory input, and when we try to measure this sensory input in a structural way, we hinder this understanding of bodily potential and thus it becomes a cultural function: “Nature and culture are in mutual movement into and through each other” (Massumi(2002), Pp.11).

Affects are pre-personal intensities occurring when the body passes from one experiential state to another, and can thus not be described as either a subjective feeling or an emotion (feelings are personal and biographical, emotions are social and affects are thus pre-personal)(Shouse(2005)). These distinctions are important if one is to use affect theory as an alternative method for understanding human reactions to cultural phenomena, as opposed to formalistic or structural readings etc. Feelings are sensations that have been labeled and checked against previous experiences and are personal because each person has unique sets of experiences to refer to in their previous experiences. Emotions are the projections or displays of feelings – and can thus be either genuine or fake. They can be affected by social expectations or other motivations. Affect is the moment of unformed and unstructured experience and is thus very abstract, as it cannot be fully described in language because it is outside of consciousness – and it is this abstractness that appeals to many contemporary cultural theorists (Massumi(2002), Pp. 15). Shouse writes that “Affect is the body’s way of preparing itself for action in a given circumstance by adding a quantitative dimension of intensity to the quality of an experience” (Shouse(2005)).

The body has it’s own way of understanding inputs that cannot be fully captured in language. According to Shouse affect is what “makes feelings feel and what makes the intensity of a feeling”. Affect always precedes consciousness (and will) and can be described as the multiple stimuli our bodies register and thus transform into a bodily intensity, which, according to Massumi can be described as “pure potential” (Massumi(2002), Pp. 30). Shouse quotes Silvan Tompkins explaining that affect has the power to influence consciousness in the way that it can raise our awareness of our biological state, comparing the state of affect to the pain mechanism, which makes us aware of our bodily presence. I would argue however that it is important to remember that both feelings and emotions (also if they are socially or culturally “learned”) play a big (and important) role in our reactions to visual material, especially when it comes to building empathy, which I will touch upon later.

How can we use our affective responses in terms of understanding sensory input, art, media and other stimuli that we meet in our daily lives? What is interesting about affect is, that since it is unstructured and unformed it can be “transmitted” between separate bodies. This doesn’t imply that one person’s feelings “become” another’s but rather that “your body infolds a context and another body (real or virtual) is expressing intensity in that context, one intensity is infolded into another.”(Shouse(2005)). This creates a form of resonance where bodies respond to each other on a pre-conscious level and the power of the media/art form lies in this ability to create affective resonances independent of content or meaning. It is thus this abstractness, this bodily reaction and transmittable potential that is the power and interesting aspect of affect, which is closely tied to our ability to feel empathy, and which makes it interesting in an art and media context.

A paragraph from the interview with Bryant:” If his mission was to monitor a high-value target, he might linger above a single house for weeks. It was a voyeuristic intimacy. He watched the targets drink tea with friends, play with their children, have sex with their wives on rooftops, writhing under blankets. There were soccer matches, and weddings too. He once watched a man walk out into a field and take a crap, which glowed white in infrared.” (Powers(2013)).

As previously stated, drone footage is not cinema, and it neither has narrative or even documentary value. It’s a hard to define new kind of real-time video-intervention-warfare. But the testimony from Bryant suggests a level of identification with, or relating to, the humanness of the people he is surveilling, as he is following their lives. This identification brings in an affective response that made it very hard to have the desensitized approach to his work his employers probably wished for. In order to understand this bodily reaction looking at the cognitive and affective responses to film-spectatorship can be an interesting pathway into thinking of affect and empathy.

Cognitive film theorists deal with these subject matters, showing how emotional responses, such as empathy, and cognitive processes (inborn mechanisms that reconstructs responses in the viewer, as opposed to cultural knowledge (Grodal (1997) Pp. 20)).) play crucial roles in the reception of film.
Most people can relate to the idea of “sharing” emotions with persons they encounter on a screen, regardless of whether these persons are fictional or real, and we identify with them by following the narrative being built over time and the identification of certain human traits that we mirror ourselves in. The more we gain insight into their life situation, their feelings and struggles, the easier it is for us to identify. Identification with characters has been a subject in film theory since it’s birth. Cognitive film analysts, such as Torben Grodal, however are interested in the physical, bodily reactions to viewing film, taking the spectatorship away from a conception of being passive, to being active. It implies a move away from conventional readings of this character-identification, by looking at bodily reaction patterns as the main source of viewer interaction and identification(Grodal (1997), Pp. 7). For example Grodal notes that in an evolutionary perspective our abilities to empathize and identify with other people, as well as cognitively simulate their situation are linked to our survival as species. We, as humans, try to intuitively understand and simulate the feelings, motives and cognitive focus of others. For Grodal empathy plays a significant role when the viewer cognitively constructs a narrative identifying with the agents of fictions.

Our cognitive “software” is developed through evolution as a tool for navigating through essential biological and human preferences and motivations, which, according to Grodal, are food, security, erotic gratification and social acceptance. Emotions and affects are linked to these preferences, and filmic experiences, which trigger these deeply rooted human conditions, can create empathetic understanding within the viewer. Our remote senses, our eyes and ears, work to create our embodied perception of the world through our cognitive capabilities. The perception via the remote senses relies on our memory of bodily sensory experiences. For example if we have strong subject identification with the protagonist we will try and simulate their perceptions through mirroring of our own cognitive perceptions. These cognitive identifications, which can in some instances be empathy, happen on a very general level and transcend gender, race, and social boundaries, as well as human/non-human beings (however the identification may be stronger if the protagonist resembles the viewer in a specific way) . The cognitive identification may however not necessarily be positive identification or empathy with a protagonist.

The main point in Grodal’s thesis is that the motor system is controlled by basic human preferences such as avoiding danger, finding food or mating, which are transformed into cognitive scripts – plans and goals for identifying, which are related to previous emotional and affective experiences. And empathy will thus very often be the consequence of a long process of following one character, giving the spectator an opportunity to identify with their motives and plans. According to Grodal, cinematic perception is a synaesthetic experience, where the mind and the body are not conceived as separate parts. Cinematic perception requires a bodily participation in the production of the viewer experience – and these mechanisms are constantly at work making sense of what the eye and ear encounters. Grodal argues that cognition, motivation and affect are three aspects of one information-processing system which are only differentiated in the way they appear in consciousness (for instance as intensities or as making sense of a narrative).

Grodal’s theory of film spectatorship is distinctively developed to analyze fiction film, with a relatively large focus on conventional filmic narratives. However the reason I have drawn his work in as an example is the fact that it shows the bodily experience as a parameter for understanding our reactions as perceivers of moving images. If we take into consideration these theories of the processes of cognitive and empathetic identification when watching moving images it may give some useful tools of understanding drone footage and the role of the drone operator/viewer.
Affect occurs when we encounter a sensory stimulus, and in some instances, as Grodal’s theories show, it fosters empathy - specifically when the storyline allow us to follow the life of the character and thus mirror ourselves in their action. In the article “Empathy in The Time of Technology: How Storytelling is Key to Empathy” P.J. Manney discusses the issue of empathy in new technologies, stating that in a world where technology becomes more and more predominant the role of empathy grows larger and ever more important. She also states that, in theory, sensory/media input stimulates mirror neurons, which enable empathy; however, practically empathy is created through storytelling. Mirror neurons reside in the pre-motor area of the brain and they increase an individual’s ability to understand the behavior of others, and without the stimulation of this understanding there is little motivation for the human brain to reach out and “feel for” the other (Manney (2008)).

When reading the testimonies of drone operators such as Bryant, but also Heather Linebaugh in The Guardian, you realize immediately that while drones may be automated killer-machines, the people behind the screens certainly are not. Linebaugh writes in her outcry:” Whenever I read comments by politicians defending the Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Predator and Reaper program – aka drones – I wish I could ask them a few questions. I'd start with: "How many women and children have you seen incinerated by a Hellfire missile?" And: "How many men have you seen crawl across a field, trying to make it to the nearest compound for help while bleeding out from severed legs?" … Few of these politicians who so brazenly proclaim the benefits of drones have a real clue of what actually goes on. I, on the other hand, have seen these awful sights first hand.” (Linebaugh (2013))

It is not my objective to heroize drone operators in any way or talk their case against the military or decision-makers of drone intervention in general. My aim investigating their job is to draw attention to the fact that affective responses and empathy, as I can see it, do occur through these kinds of real-time screen-mediated encounters with others. And looking at drone technology serves for me as example of the human reaction to the mediated other, as the operators are following the day-to-day lives of their targets and also clearly seeing the brutal ramifications of their actions. The “human reality” is in my opinion not rendered away by technology as Virilio proclaimed. It is still very real, present and pressing – we cannot escape from it. What theories of affect and empathy show us is that it is fundamentally hard to remove the body from the sensorial stimuli that we encounter, specifically when it comes to the encounter with other humans. But it is possible to repress these bodily and emotional responses, and as Bryant reminds us, this was encouraged amongst the drone operators, leaving the affective responses in an unaddressed state (they clearly encounter an affective response to what they see and interact with on screen, but there is an attitude of repressing and shutting down emotions as part of the job) that eventually leads to PTSD and anxiety. Linebaugh expresses this with painful clarity:” I know the feeling you experience when you see someone die. Horrifying barely covers it. And when you are exposed to it over and over again it becomes like a small video, embedded in your head, forever on repeat, causing psychological pain and suffering that many people will hopefully never experience. UAV troops are victim to not only the haunting memories of this work that they carry with them, but also the guilt of always being a little unsure of how accurate their confirmations of weapons or identification of hostile individuals were.
Of course, we are trained to not experience these feelings, and we fight it, and become bitter. Some troops seek help in mental health clinics provided by the military, but we are limited on who we can talk to and where, because of the secrecy of our missions. I find it interesting that the suicide statistics in this career field aren't reported, nor are the data on how many troops working in UAV positions are heavily medicated for depression, sleep disorders and anxiety.” (Linebaugh (2013))

Through the camera view of the drone, displayed on the monitor thousands of miles away, the death of the enemy becomes disembodied and distanced, but nevertheless real. There is a sort of quasi-tactility of the human other in the drone view, where the infrared silhouette of the person becomes a symbol for a very fundamentally human quality – heat. The drone operators talk of infrared ghosts haunting their dreams.
My argument is that drone technologies are symptomatic of a very important turning point in terms of how we situate our roles as humans in the context of technological development – on all levels. They show very well the paradox of affective responses and the distance that happens between human bodies through a technological mediation.

Moving towards the role of the public in relation to the drone-attack videos that can be found on Youtube, there is an abundance of critical voices stating that empathy is decreasing with new media technologies, that the citizens of the world are becoming mindless consumers of media information on a variety of platforms, especially blaming social media (Manney (2008)). But in my eyes there is also an abundance of affect in networked media, where interaction and information evokes strong feelings, where activism and outrage against inequality and violence is met with collaboration and mobilization (e.g. witness.org, democracynow.org, change.org etc.). I don’t believe that consumers of media messages today are any less (or more) affected when they encounter, for example, the death or suffering of another person through mediated representation than they were seeing it in the early printing-press days. However I do think that there is little time and often very little context when it comes to digesting these media messages in our current media environment, dominated by feeds, flashes of ‘breaking news’ headlines and exchanges of images and videos. I agree with Manney that there needs to be a context in order to make sense and actively engage with what we encounter in this online media environment.

Watching those drone-attack videos, accompanied by mindless youtube comments and nothing else, I couldn’t help feeling rather distanced. The context was simply too weird. In an environment of networked media where sharing image-based material is incredibly easy, first hand witness testimonies become important ways of creating empathy. And in this case Manney’s cry for non-image based narration fostering empathy may be a valuable point. Her argument is that we might very well risk evolving past our empathetic potentials (potentials that according to Grodal are fundamental to our survival in an evolutionary perspective). However she does not denounce new media technologies’ potential to create more empathy, giving the example of new media literary explorations on blogs and empathetically focused video games. Reading the testimonies of the drone operators left an incredibly powerful impression on me, an impression the drone-footage videos (which nevertheless is the most truly “documenting” evidence of what the drones do) never could provide. They expressed the human ramifications of drone warfare and how it implicates and affects the lives of both the operators and the people living under the drones. To me these testimonies emphasize the importance of creating an awareness of affective response when navigating through a media landscape, so that these affects do not become “trapped” and result in passivity and disconnectedness on the viewer/perceiver’s end. They also show the importance of testimonies, and that the story behind an image is incredibly important for our ability to empathize and thus act towards a particular ethical problem that we encounter .
Because human interaction through mediated extensions in whatever form they may take will not become any less in the future (quite the contrary) there needs to be a discourse around the importance of understanding what happens to our interhuman relations when mediated through a screen, and how we can work to maintain empathy for one another even though we are not face to face. The technological development of the media utilized in drones show that if we blindly put our trust in the presumed effectivity and benefits of new technologies, without considering the implications on ourselves, the technology will truly determine our situation, as Kittler would have said. And this may not be for our benefit at all.

There is great potential for storytelling, activism and empathy through digital/networked media technologies, which has eloquently been shown around the world. I don’t wish to think there is a loss of key human capacities – I wish to think there is a lack of unused potential for emotionally meaningful human interaction through (digital/networked) media technologies. As Clay Shirky calls it, there is a Cognitive Surplus of online citizens coming together for one cause or the other (view Shirky’s TED talk about Cognitive Surplus here). As Shirky states, networked media technologies have the capacity for collaboration, interaction, and creation (whether it’s LOL-cats or online witness/testimony archives). While Shirky is a true internet-optimist, I do think there is a real danger of losing empathy and empathetic skills in an online media environment. This is why it’s of tremendous importance to implement digital/networked (media) technology ethics in education, in the societal discourse, in the work of journalists and in everyday life online. How do we foster and nourish empathy in this new media reality? How do we go about dealing with emotions, affects and feelings when disconnected from face-to-face human interaction? This is what I think Huhtamo is requesting in his “screenology”, however there is more to the equation than merely looking at the technological genealogy of the media objects we use today. It is just as important to realize what technology does to our brains and bodies, and how we can turn technological connectedness into human connectedness – and not the contrary.

Art has a unique ability to foster this immediate intensity, this bodily reaction called affect. Brian Massumi argues, as earlier touched upon, that affect is a kind of unstructured and unformed experience that can be “transmitted” between separate bodies on a pre-conscious level. This perhaps resonates most strongly when we encounter art that deals with difficult or traumatic narratives. One may recognize the feeling of physically reacting to an artwork or an evocatively told story, by disgust, a shiver, choking up unexpectedly etc.. The meeting with the artwork becomes an indefinable and immediate intensity of bodily response. Artists often attempt to understand aspects of the world through different forms of representation, forms that may prove more effective (and affective) than what is used in news media. They often insist on discovering what cannot be conveyed through the conventionally conceived documentary media forms, exactly in order to try and approach what is otherwise hidden, repressed or incomprehensible. It is in these hybrid experimentations across representational forms that artistic research can provide some kind of understanding of the world that hardly can be described in any other way. It provides another view on what we call reality, a view that is not afraid of approaching the unknown, the disorganized or what exists in the grey zones between the presumably “documenting” representation and fiction, in order to question the very possibility of representation, or to reveal some kind of previously hidden or vague nuance.
Taking this approach to artistic research resonates very well with me in the light of affect theory.
Learning about the different aspects of drone war at times placed me in a state of shock. Comparing my reaction to the videos on Youtube, with the one I had reading the testimonies of the operators I became more aware of the impact of the mode of representation, of a context in which to situate the subject matter, of a human face behind the mediated account of drone wars, in order for me to digest the atrocities and human consequences of drone technology. This resonates the importance of the speed with which one digests visual imagery, and the paradox of affective responses and the distance that might occur within the viewer. My work is a reflection upon these reactions. By creating a Zoetrope I wanted to make a visual investigation of the screen in a historical context – as a reaction to the speed of the flow of clips Youtube I forced it into the form and speed of one of the first screens invented. With this screen the viewer can decide the speed of the moving image herself, and reflect upon the meaning of speed when encountering moving images. Learning about Media Archaeology as a theoretical approach made me realize the importance of looking at the development of media objects in order to understand our relationship with them today within a time perspective (to break the illusion of timelessness in Huhtamo’s words). The Zoetrope was also an attempt to visualize the correlation between Virilio’s idea of war and cinema being interrelated, and it’s shape and material is inspired by the burnt, crumbling metal of the war airplanes in the Technical Museum Berlin.

Virilio talks about how the acceleration of events, technological development and speed in our current societies gives way to “…a double movement of implosion and explosion”, so that the “new war machine combines a double disappearance: The disappearance of matter in nuclear disintegration and the disappearance of places in vehicular extermination” (Virilio (1986), Pp. 134). In the animation strip I took the defining moment of destruction, the explosion, making into an eternal loop of imploding and exploding, trying to create a sensorial, interactive experience of this moment as a counter-act to my own perception of encountering the original clip of a drone attack on Youtube.
It became evident as my research progressed, that the media archaeological approach was not sufficient in understanding the implications and aspects of the human interaction through the camera/screen technology of the drone. I wanted to explore how to deal more clearly with the situation of the surveillor (the drone operator) and the live-transmitted footage of the surveilled, and how that relationship may play out. What stuck with me were the profoundly disturbing aspects of the drone operator’s work and the implications this peculiar situation had on them on a personal level. I started researching where they geographically work, where the drones usually patrol, and through the only available tool I had, Google Earth, I tried to imagine what they might see on those screens. I spent hours scrolling through the Nevada Desert and found large residential trailer parks surrounding the air bases, imagining them going there after a day’s work of shooting and surveilling people on the other side of the planet, to eat, sleep, play with their kids. I tried to create a narrative, which, through the beauty and eeriness of the images captured from Google Earth, became quite cinematic. The film thus became another way of attempting to transfer my affective responses to researching this subject matter through my artistic process to whoever may interact with it. I wanted to convey this feeling I had of uncovering, almost counter-surveilling, the lives of the drone operators (however imagined this role may be!), finding pictures of drone test-sites on Google images, discovering how these same pictures had been rendered away subsequently on Google Earth, and looking for hidden air bases in the Saudi desert which you can only find if you know the exact latitude. At the same time I wanted to transfer the eerie feeling I myself had of being surveilled for my activities and search history online.

Another interesting aspect when thinking about the phenomenology of the moving images of drones is the aspect of sound. According to Hussein there is a desynchronization between sound and image in the transmitted image. Whereas the drone operators see all, they lack the sound of the environment they see, whereas where the people living under the drones cannot see the “eye in the sky” but suffer from the perpetual buzzing of the drones (Hussein(2013)). The film is called Machar, which means Mosquito in Urdu – something locals in Pakistan calls the drones. The previously mentioned rapport from Stanford/NYU state that one factor of anxiety and fear for immediate future symptoms among communities living in drone-surveilled areas is the constant buzzing. People are always reminded of this threat of attack, but they never know when it will occur. With the sound track of the film I tried to explore this discrepancy. The sound of an 8mm film projector is accompanying the image when the footage of the geographical areas of the “surveillors” is being displayed. When the footage from the surveilled areas is seen the sound of bugs flying is accompanying the image. Both tracks are composed of 2 versions of the same sound, a real-time and a ultra-slow version in the attempt to point out the relationships between the film image, sound and time. The sound turned out to further emphasize the evocative and cinematic atmosphere of the film, and thus underlining the way sound structures the moving image and how we perceive it.
At the end of the video the satellite camera of Google Earth sweeps over the pixilated topography surrounding the Nevada air base, and as it is colliding with the ground the sound cuts out and the youtube video of a group of black infrared shapes moves across the screen. Suddenly the explosion occurs, to shake the viewer out of the cinematic illusion and point back to the reality of the essential purpose of drones. This shift is an attempt to create an affective reaction in the viewer, and hopefully one of impacting the viewer to take into the consideration the impact of the moving image, how it is structured and how they react to it. In this way I am trying to embody the theoretical research part of this project into an affective response within the viewer.

To me this is as close as I can get to an understanding of what artistic research means to me at the current moment. Through working with this subject matter on a simultaneously theoretical and practical level it has become clear to me that the subject of the technology of drones is just an example, or a catalyst, for me to explore more fundamental aspects of underlying issues and questions of the discourse around me, facing an increasing amount of interhuman communication through new media technologies. Considering more deeply my motivations for and interest in this subject matter it becomes increasingly clear that my attempt to define the new circumstances of interhuman relations through a mediated representation was also a way for me to affirm the role of the human in an increasingly disembodied network society that is forming around me. I want to reassure myself of this bodily connection, and create awareness of the importance to consider the implications that a mindless approach to developing new media technologies can bring along. However I do not wish to fall into the trap of techno-dystopia. I am intrigued by new advances in technology and love the Internet with all its potential – but with precautions. Using Google as a tool to create artwork about surveillance is an attempt for me to use the idea of the Internet as potential for affective resistance, a resistance that is very much alive in the discourse about drones. As much as governments and militaries are trying to obscure the agendas of drone use, the users of the internet are also kicking back. Examples of this are Dronestagram, where a tumblr-user updates his feed with images and facts about each and every US-drone attack, Democracy Now, The Bureau of Investigative Journalism, numerous articles, reports and blogs about locations, numbers and facts regarding drones etc. These for me are prime examples of what Clay Shirky talks about in regards to Cognitive Surplus, which I hope this research will contribute to.
