This is a book about the things people say about images. It is not primarily concerned with specific pictures and the things people say about them, but rather with the way we talk about the idea of imagery, and all its related notions of picturing, imagining, perceiving, likening, and imitating. It is a book about images, therefore, that has no illustrations except for a few schematic diagrams, a book about vision written as if by a blind author for a blind reader. If it contains any insight into real, material pictures, it is the sort that might come to a blind listener, overhearing the conversation of sighted speakers talking about images. M y hypothesis is that such a listener might see patterns in these conversations that would be invisible to the sighted participant. The book reflects on answers to two questions that come up regularly in these conversations: What is an image? What is the difference between images and words? It attempts to understand the traditional answers to these questions in relation to the human interests that give them urgency in particular situations. Why does it matter what an image is? What is at stake in marking off or erasing the differences between images and words? What are the systems of power and canons of value—that is, the ideologies—that inform the answers to these questions and make them matters of polemical dispute rather than purely theoretical interest?
If all this sounds impossibly comprehensive, it may help to note that this study has very definite limits, both in terms of the questions it raises and the body of texts it considers. Except for the first chapter this is primarily a series of close readings of a few important texts in the theory of imagery, and these readings revolve around two historical centers, one in the late eighteenth century (roughly, the era of the French Revolution and the rise of Romanticism), the other in the era of modern criticism. The aim of these readings is to show how the notion of imagery serves as a kind of relay connecting theories of art, language, and the mind with conceptions of social, cultural, and political value.

My only apology for these strange conjunctions of topics and texts is that they seemed to surface as I pursued the theoretical questions that inspired the study in the first place. Every theoretical answer to the questions, What is an image? Ho w are images different from words? seemed inevitably to fall back into prior questions of value and interest that could only be answered in historical terms. The simplest way of stating this is to admit that a book which began with the intention of producing a valid theory of images became a book about the fear of images. "Iconology" turned out to be, not just the science of icons, but the political psychology of icons, the study of iconophobia, iconophilia, and the struggle between iconoclasm and idolatry. The movement of this book is thus from modern attempts to establish a true theory of imagery (Gombrich, Goodman, the early Wittgenstein) to the "classic" accounts of imagery these theories sought to replace. In the process, my theoretical ambitions have inevitably been chastened by my narrow limits as an intellectual historian. My hope is that this critical fall into the space between theory and history will open up a region for other scholars to explore, and that it will suggest something about the necessary limits of any attempt to provide a theoretical account of symbolic practices.

Two things must immediately strike the notice of anyone who tries to take a general view of the phenomena called by the name of imagery. The first is simply the wide variety of things that go by this name. We speak of pictures, statues, optical illusions, maps, diagrams, dreams, hallucinations, spectacles, projections, poems, patterns, memories, and even ideas as images, and the sheer diversity of this list would seem to make any systematic, unified understanding impossible. The second thing that may strike us is that the calling of all these things by the name of "image" does not necessarily mean that they all have something in common. It might be better to begin by thinking of images as a far-flung family which has migrated in time and space and undergone profound mutations in the process. If images are a family, however, it may be possible to construct some sense of their genealogy. If we begin by looking, not for some universal definition of the term, but at those places where images have differentiated themselves from one another on the basis of boundaries between different institutional discourses, we come up with a family tree something like the following.

The mental and verbal images on the right side of our diagram, for instance, would seem to be images only in some doubtful, metaphork sense. People may report experiencing images in their heads while reading or dreaming, but we have only their word for this; there is no way (so the argument goes) to check up on this objectively. An d even if we trust the reports of mental imagery, it seems clear that they must be different from real, material pictures. Mental images don't seem to be stable and permanent the way real images are, and they vary from one person to the next: if I say "green," some listeners may see green in their mind's eye, but some may see a word, or nothing at all. An d mental images don't seem to be exclusively visual the way real pictures are; they involve all the senses. Verbal imagery, moreover, can involve all the senses, or it may involve no sensory component at all, sometimes suggesting nothing more than a recurrent abstract idea like justice or grace or evil. It is no wonder that literary scholars get very nervous when people start taking the notion of verbal imagery too literally." An d it is hardly surprising that one of the main thrusts of modern psychology and philosophy has been to discredit the notions of both mental and verbal imagery.
Wittgenstein's way of attacking mental imagery is not, however, the direct strategy of denying the existence of such images. He freely concedes that we may have mental images associated with thought or speech, insisting only that these images should not be thought of as private, metaphysical, immaterial entities any more than real images are. Wittgenstein's tactic is to demystify the mental image by bringing it right out in the open where we can see it: "Mental images of colours, shapes, sounds, etc., etc., which play a role in communication by means of language we put in the same category with patches of color actually seen, sounds heard."  It is a bit hard, however, to see how we can put mental and physical images "in the same category." We certainly can't do it by cutting open someone's head to compare mental pictures with the ones on our walls. A better strategy, and more in the Wittgensteinian spirit, would be to examine the ways we put those images "into our heads" in the first place by trying to picture the sort of world in which this move would make sense. I offer the figure on the next page as just such a picture.

But if the key to the recognition of real, material images in the world is our curious ability to say "there" and "not there" at the same time, we must then ask why mental images should be seen as any more—or less—mysterious than "real" images. The problem philosophers and ordinary people have always had with the notion of mental images is that they seem to have a universal basis in real, shared experience (we all dream, visualize, and are capable, in varying degrees, of re-presenting concrete sensations to ourselves), but we cannot point to them and say "There—that is a mental image." Exacdy the same sort of problem occurs, however, if I try to point to a real image and explain what it is to someone who doesn't already know what an image is. I point at Xeuxis's painting and say "There, that is an image." And the reply is, "D o you mean that colored surface?" Or "Do you mean those grapes?"

This is not to be taken as a claim that the mind really is a blank slate or a mirror—only that these are ways the mind is capable of picturing itself. It might picture itself in other ways: as a building, a statue, as an invisible gas or fluid, as a text, a narrative, or a melody, or as nothing in particular. It might decline to have a picture of itself, and refuse all selfrepresentation, just as we can look at a picture, a statue, or a mirror and not see it as a representational object. We might look at mirrors as shiny vertical objects, paintings as masses of colors on flat surfaces. There is no rule that the mind has to picture itself, or see pictures in itself, any more than there is a rule that we must go into a picture gallery, or that once inside we must look at the pictures. If we eliminate the notion that there is something necessary, natural, or automatic about the formation of both mental and material images, then we can do as Wittgenstein suggests, and put them "in the same category" as functional symbols, or, as in our model, in the same logical space. 17 This does not eliminate all differences between mental and physical images, but it may help to demystify the metaphysical or occult quality of this difference, and to allay our suspicion that mental images are somehow improper or illegitimately modeled on the "real thing." The path of derivation from original model to illegitimate analogy could as easily be traced in the opposite direction.

A good way to clarify the relation of mental and physical images is to reflect on the way we have just used a diagram to illustrate the matrix of analogies that connects theories of representation to theories of mind. We might be tempted to say that a mental version of this diagram was in our heads all along, before it appeared on the page, and that it was governing the way we discussed the boundary between mental and physical images. Well, perhaps it was; or perhaps it only occurred to us at a certain point in the discussion, when we began to use words like "boundary line" and "realm." Or perhaps it never occurred to us at all while thinking about these things or writing them down, and it was only later, after many revisions, that it came to mind. Does that mean that the mental diagram was there all along as a kind of unconscious deep structure determining our usage of the word "image"? Or is it a posterior construction, a graphic projection of the logical space implied in our propositions about imagery? In either case we certainly cannot regard the diagram as something mental in the sense of "private" or "subjective"; it is rather something that surfaced in language, and not just my language, but a way of speaking that we inherit from a long tradition of talking about minds and pictures. Our diagram might just as well be called a "verbal image" as a mental one, which brings us to that other notoriously illegitimate branch in the family tree of imagery, the notion of imagery in language.

This view of poetry, and of language in general, as a process of pictorial production and reproduction was accompanied in seventeenthand eighteenth-century English literary theory by a decline in the prestige of rhetorical figures and tropes. The notion of "image" replaced that of "figure," which began to be regarded as a feature of old-fashioned "ornamented" language. The literary style of verbal imagery is "plain" and "perspicuous," a style that reaches right out to objects, representing them (as Addison claims) even more vividly than the objects can represent themselves. This in contrast to the "deceptive ornament" of rhetoric, which is now seen as nothing but a matter of relations among signs. When the rhetorical figures are mentioned, they are either dismissed as the artificial excesses of a prerational, prescientific age, or they are redefined in ways that accommodate them to the hegemony of the verbal image. Metaphors are redefined as "short descriptions"; "allusions and similes are descriptions placed in an opposite point of view . . . and hyperbole is often nothing more than a description carried beyond the bounds of probability." Even abstractions are treated as pictorial, visual objects, projected in the verbal imagery of personification. In Romantic and modern poetics the verbal image retained its hold over the understanding of literary language, and the confused application of the term to both literal and figurative expression continued to encourage a lumping of notions such as description, concrete nouns, tropes, "sensory" terms, and even recurrent semantic, syntactic, or phonemic motifs under the rubric of "imagery." In order to do all this work, however, the notion of imagery had to be sublimated and mystified. Romantic writers typically assimilate mental, verbal, and even pictorial imagery into the mysterious process of "imagination," which is typically defined in contrast to the "mere" recall of mental pictures, the "mere" description of external scenes, and (in painting) the "mere" depiction of external visibilia, as opposed to the spirit, feeling, or "poetry" of a scene.

This progressive sublimation of the image reaches its logical culmination when the entire poem or text is regarded as an image or 'Verbal icon," and this image is defined, not as a pictorial likeness or impression, but as a synchronic structure in some metaphorical space—"that which" (in Pound's words) "presents an intellectual and emotional complex in an instant of time." The Imagists's emphasis on concrete, particular descriptions in their poetry is, by itself, a residue of the eighteenthcentury notion we have seen in Addison that poetry strives to outdo in vividness and immediacy the "images which flow from objects themselves" (Williams's "no ideas but in things" would seem to be another version of this idea). But the distinctive modernist emphasis is on the image as a sort of crystalline structure, a dynamic pattern of the intellectual and emotional energy bodied forth by a poem. Formalist criticism is both a poetics and a hermeneutics for this kind of verbal image, showing us how poems contain their energies in matrices of architectonic tension, and demonstrating the congruence of these matrices with the propositional content of the poem.

If the figure of the pictogram or hieroglyph demands a viewer who knows what to say, it also has a way of shaping the things that can be said. Consider further the ambiguous emblem/signature/ideogram of the petroglyph "eagle." If the warrior is an eagle, or "like" an eagle, or (more likely) if "Eagle himself" goes to war, and returns to tell about it, we can expect the picture to be extended. Eagle will no doubt see his enemies from afar and swoop down on them without warning. The "verbal image" of Eagle is a complex of speech, depiction, and writing that not only describes what he does, but predicts and shapes what he can and will do. It is his "character," a signature that is both verbal and pictorial, both a narrative of his actions and a summation of what he is.

But what exactly is this "spiritual" likeness which is not to be confused with any material image? We should note first that it seems to include a presumption of difference. To say that one tree, or one member of a species of tree, is like another, is not to argue that they are identical but that they are similar in some respects and not in others. Normally, however, we don't say that every likeness is an image. One tree is like another, but we don't call one the image of the other. The word "image" only comes up in relation to this sort of likeness when we try to construct a theory about the way we perceive the likeness between one tree and another. This explanation will typically resort to some intermediate or transcendental object—an idea, form, or mental image—that provides a mechanism for explaining how our categories arise. The "origin of species" is not just a matter of biological evolution then, but of the mechanisms of consciousness as they are described in representational models of the mind.

Is man created in the image of God, then, in that he looks like God, or in that we can say similar things about man and God? Milton wants to have it both ways, a desire we can trace to his rather unorthodox materialism, or perhaps more fundamentally, to a historic transformation in the concept of imagery which tended to identify the notion of spiritual likeness—particularly the "rational soul" that makes man an image of God—with a certain kind of material image. Milton's poetry is the scene of a struggle between iconoclastic distrust of the outward image and iconophilic fascination with its power, a struggle which manifests itself in his practice of proliferating visual images in order to prevent readers from focusing on any particular picture or scene. In order to see how the stage was set for this struggle we need to look more closely at the revolution which identified pictures or "artificial forms" with images as "likenesses" (Maimonides' "specific forms").

The revolution I am thinking of here was, of course, the invention of artificial perspective, first systematized by Alberti in 1435. The effect of this invention was nothing less than to convince an entire civilization that it possessed an infallible method of representation, a system for the automatic and mechanical production of truths about the material and the mental worlds. The best index to the hegemony of artificial perspective is the way it denies its own artificiality and lays claims to being a "natural" representation of "the way things look," "the way we see," or (in a phrase that turns Maimonides on his head) "the way things really are." Aided by the political and economic ascendance of Western Europe, artificial perspective conquered the world o f representation under the banner of reason, science, and objectivity. N o amount of counterdemonstration from artists that there are other ways of picturing what "we really see" has been able to shake the conviction that these pictures have a kind of identity with natural human vision and objective external space. An d the invention of a machine (the camera) built to produce this sort of image has, ironically, only reinforced the conviction that this is the natural mode of representation. What is natural is, evidendy, what we can build a machine to do for us.

If we discount the obvious hostility from Twain and Lessing's comments on the poverty of pictorial expression, we find a rather perspicuous account of what is meant by the notion of painting the invisible. What expression amounts to is the artful planting of certain clues in a picture that allow us to form an act of ventriloquism, an act which endows the picture with eloquence, and particularly with a nonvisual and verbal eloquence. A picture may articulate abstract ideas by means of allegorical imagery, a practice which, as Lessing notes, approaches the notational procedures of writing systems. The image of an eagle may depict a feathered predator, but it expresses the idea of wisdom, and thus works as a hieroglyph. Or we may understand expression in dramatic, oratorical terms, as did the Renaissance humanists who formulated a rhetoric of history painting complete with a language of facial expression and gesture, a language precise enough to let us verbalize what depicted figures are thinking, feeling, or saying. And expression need not be limited to predicates we can attach to pictured objects: the setting, compositional arrangement, and color scheme may all carry expressive charge, so that we can speak of moods and emotional atmospheres whose appropriate verbal counterparts may be something on the order of a lyric poem.

If I seem to be taking Twain's ironic attitude toward the claims of pictorial expression, it is not because I think that expression is impossible or illusory, but because our understanding of it is so often clouded by the same mystique of "natural representation" that obstructs our understanding of mimetic representation. Twain says that the label is worth more, for information, than "a ton of significant expression." But we might ask Twain how much the label would be worth, for information or for anything else, without this picture by Guido Reni, or the entire tradition of representing in pictorial, dramatic, or literary images the story of the Cenci. The painting is a confluence of pictorial and verbal traditions, neither of which is apparent to the innocent eyes of Twain, and so he can scarcely see what it is, much less respond to it.

What are we to make of this contest between the interests of verbal and pictorial representation? I propose that we historicize it, and treat it, not as a matter for peaceful settlement under the terms of some allembracing theory of signs, but as a struggle that carries the fundamental contradictions of our culture into the heart of theoretical discourse itself. The point, then, is not to heal the split between words and images, but to see what interests and powers it serves. This view can only be had, of course, from a standpoint which begins with skepticism about the adequacy of any particular theory of the relation of words and images, but which also preserves an intuitive conviction that there is some difference that is fundamental. It seems to me that Lessing, for instance, is absolutely right insofar as he regards poetry and painting as radically different modes or representation, but that his "mistake" (which theory still participates in) is the reification of this difference in terms of analogous oppositions like nature and culture, space and time.

Emerson once noted that the most fruitful conversations are always between two persons, not three. This principle may help to explain why the dialogue between poetry and painting has tended to dominate general discussions of the arts, and why music has seemed something of an outsider to the conversation. Al l the arts may aspire to the condition of music, but when they set out to argue, poetry and painting hold the stage. One reason for this is that they both lay claim to the same territory (reference, representation, denotation, meaning), a territory that music has tended to renounce. Another reason is that the differences between words and images seem so fundamental. They are not merely different kinds of creatures, but opposite kinds. They attract to their contest all the contrarieties and oppositions that riddle the discourse of criticism, the very discourse that takes as one of its projects a unified theory of the arts, an "aesthetics" which aspires to a synoptic view of artistic signs, a "semiotics" which hopes to comprehend all signs whatsoever.

This gap has two important functions in discussions of the arts and their symbol systems: it lends an air of tough-minded common sense to assertions of difference between the arts, and it gives an air of paradoxical daring and ingenuity to assertions of sameness or transference. The topic of the text-image difference provides an occasion for the exercise of the two great rhetorical skills, wit and judgment, "wit," as Edmund Burke noted, being "chiefly conversant in tracing resemblances," and judgment concerned mainly with "finding differences."1 Since aesthetics and semiotics dream of a theory that will satisfy both the need to discriminate artistic signs and to identify the principles that unite them, both these approaches to the topic have established themselves as traditional alternatives within the discourse of criticism. The mode of wit, the "tracing of resemblances," is the foundation of the ut pictura poesis and "sister arts" tradition in criticism, the construction of analogies or critical conceits that identify points of transference and resemblance between texts and images. Although these conceits are almost always accompanied by acknowledgments of differences between the arts, they are generally perceived as violations of good judgment that criticism ought to correct. Lessing opens the Laocoon by observing that "the first who compared painting with poetry was a man of fine feeling," not a critic or philosopher. 2 H e was, as Lessing goes on to explain, Simonides of Ceos, the legendary founder of the ut pictura poesis tradition. Lessing characterizes Simonides as a man of feeling and wit, "the Greek Voltaire," whose "dazzling antithesis that painting is dumb poetry and poetry speaking painting, stood in no textbook. It was one of those conceits, occurring frequendy in Simonides, the inexactness and falsity of which we feel constrained to overlook for the sake of the truth they contain.

In suggesting that these judicious discriminations are figurative I do not mean to assert that they are simply false, illusory, or without efficacy. O n the contrary, I want to suggest that they are powerful distinctions that effect the way the arts arc practiced and understood. I do mean to imply, however, that they are literally false, or (more generously) figuratively true. M y argument here will be twofold: (i) there is no essential difference between poetry and painting, no difference, that is, that is given for all time by the inherent natures of the media, the objects they represent, or the laws of the human mind; (2) there arc always a number of differences in effect in a culture which allow it to sort out the distinctive qualities o f its ensemble of signs and symbols. These differences, as I have suggested, are riddled with all the antithetical values the culture wants to embrace or repudiate: the parqgone or debate of poetry and painting is never just a contest between two kinds of signs, but a struggle between body and soul, world and mind, nature and culture.

Modern discussions of the relation between texts and images have tended to reduce this question to a problem of grammar. The traditional distinctions expressed in notions like time and space, nature and convention, have, in the work of modern theorists, been replaced by distinctions between different kinds of sign functions and communicative systems. We now speak of the difference between images and texts in terms such as the analogical and the digital, the iconic and the symbolic, the singleand the double-articulated. 1 These terms, drawn from fields such as systems analysis, semiotics, and linguistics, seem to promise a new, more scientific understanding of the boundaries between painting and poetry. They hold out the hope for a more rigorous definition of the difference and, especially in the work of the structuralists, the hope for a systematic way of comparing the arts. Modern theory has, in short, promised something to both sides of the traditional quarrel between the witty comparatists and the judicious differentiators of the arts: to the former it promises a higher level of generality and the prospect of large structural homologies between the arts; to the latter it offers a rigorous taxonomy that allows precise differentiation of sign-types and aesthetic modes.

For an arch-conventionalist like Goodman, the phrase that would probably stand out in this passage is the one that equates "artificial divisions" between the arts with "false" divisions, thus implying that man-made, conventional distinctions are, by virtue of their artificiality, automatically false. The contrast implied between these "false, artificial divisions" and "essential" features founded on "empirical and important facts" sets off a warning bell in the mind of a conventionalist; it also ought to sound an alarm for anyone who dislikes red herrings in arguments, and send them off in search of counterexamples to those "empirical facts" that lead us to Langer's categorical imperative: "there can be no hybrid works." An empirical survey of works that attempt graftings of verbal and pictorial signs (illustrated books, narrative paintings, films and dramas) does not immediately lead us to the conclusion that such hybrids are impossible. Even Langer's own logic of "essential" differences between the arts, aside from what the empirical facts tell us, leads to no such conclusion. One could as easily argue that such differences are a necessary condition for hybridization; the "crossing" of disparate forms to form new, composite unities makes no sense without an established set of differences, artificial or natural, to be overcome. Langer's notorious claim that "there are no happy marriages in art—only successful rape" illustrates perfecdy the sense of violence and violation she associates with the conjunction of artistic media, and hints (rather vividly) at its ideological basis in categories of gender.

Or , more accurately, one might say that the same old distinctions whose inadequacy motivated the search for a "general science of signs" tend to crop up in spite of the best efforts to weed them out. The disparities within the field of iconic signs that lead Eco to regard it as an incoherent category are precisely those sorts of oppositions that have traditionally figured the difference between texts and images. Some icons are "ruled by convention but are at the same time motivated." The word "motivated" in this context stands in the place occupied by terms like "nature" in traditional accounts of the text-image difference: "motivated" signs have a natural, necessary connection with what they signify; "unmotivated" signs are arbitrary and conventional. Eco's observation that icons sometimes seem "to be more firmly linked to the basic mechanisms of perception than to explicit cultural habits" is, similarly, a semiotic redaction of the notion that (some) images are "natural signs," and amounts to a contradiction in terms for a system that begins with the notion of the sign based in language.

There would be nothing wrong with this sort of redescription if it were not advertised as a liberation from metaphysics into a new science. The translation of Hume's laws of association into sign-types or modes of figuration has considerable interest. Among other things, it helps us to see just how riddled with notions of indirect, symbolic mediation are the supposedly "direct" perceptual mechanisms of the empirical tradition. The most striking example of this sort of mediation is, as we have seen, the notion of the mental or perceptual image ("ideas" and "sense-data"), which, on the one hand, seem to guarantee veridical access to the world, on the other hand to indefinitely and irretrievably distance the world through a system of intermediate signs. This double bind may be seen most clearly in the attempt of semioticians to come up with an account of the "photographic sign."

These doubly natural signs, iconic and indexical, then serve as the foundation for all further intellection and discourse. Among other things, they stand as the referents for words, which unlike the ideaimpression-mental image, signify (as Locke puts it) "not by any natural connexion . . . but by a voluntary imposition, whereby such a word is made arbitrarily the mark of such an idea." Ideas, by contrast, are naturally imprinted by experience and reflection: they are natural signs that (ideally) stand behind the arbitrary signs of language. The relation of words and ideas, discourse and thought, turns on the very same hinge that, in semiotics, connects the symbol with the indexical icon, the arbitrary code with the "natural" code.  Small wonder, then, that Roland Bardies finds himself saying the following sorts of things about photographs.
