CONFRONTING THE MACHINE An Enquiry into the Subversive Drives of Computer-Generated Art
Thesis Presented to the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences of the University of Zurich for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy by Boris Magrini
First and foremost , I want to sincerely thank Prof .
I have particularly appreciated his constructive critique , as well as his encouragement to develop my own perspective on the subject of enquiry while staying true to the sources .
Dr. Verena Kuni , Goethe University of Frankfurt , for her kind consent to evaluate the thesis as second referee .
In particular , her precise remarks as a specialist of digital art have sharpened the revision of my thesis .
Many thanks also to some of the members of the Schweizerische Gesellschaft für Mechatronische Kunst who provided me information essential to my understanding of the assembler program of the Senster : Markus Sing , Bernhard Wagner and particularly Veli Hämmerli for his considerable analysis .
I could not have completed my research without the consultation of the Victoria and Albert Museum archive : Melanie Lenz , Curator of Digital Art , was of invaluable help for the consultation of the printed works of computer art in the collection .
I am also very grateful for the numerous conversations with my colleagues of the Pro*Doc Art&Science : Dr. Sarah Schlachetzki , in particular , has been a helpful partner of many discussions and has given me valuable advice .
Sarah Culhane must be acknowledged for her enlightened and thorough revision of the manuscript .
I have been generously supported by the Fondazione Alfred Loppacher e Hélène Mettler with a three-year grant , I am sincerely grateful to Avv. Fabio Abate for this support .
Finally , my deepest gratitude goes to my parents , Luigi and Tamara Magrini for their love and support throughout the years it has taken to carry out my research .
The philosophical ideas promoted by Ray Kurzweil and his followers might be discarded as extravagant and improbable by many,3 yet these critiques did not prevent the Singularity University from forming partnerships with powerful institutions and corporations , such as Google Inc. and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration .
The involvement of Google as corporate founder of the Singularity University and its recent acquisition of the artificial intelligence company DeepMind Technologies,4 has raised some criticism and speculation among the press .
See : Ray Kurzweil , Jay Wesley Richards and George F. Gilder , Are we spiritual machines ?
The exhibition , curated by Jacob Lillemose , was tellingly entitled Uneasy Energies in Technological Times .
Often , hackers rival in creating shorter but more efficient fork bombs as a way of manifesting their computer skills .
In its simplicity , but also in its disruptive and devastating power , the simple code was regarded by the curator of the exhibition as a suitable artwork .
The fork bomb presented was depicted by software programmer and media artist Denis Roio , known as Jaromil .
Certainly , the artistic production cannot be reduced to a single approach .
Even within a narrow field such as the new media art one , there are artists , curators and historians that engage in a discourse in which works of computer art opt to focus on the generative properties of the machine and favour an approach that is compliant with computer technologies and the related scientific research .
The word ' new ' is often discarded and many refer to the field as simply ' media art ' while some critics and historians have argued that the expression ' digital art ' is preferable .
Although there is no consensus regarding the exact designation of the technologies belonging to new media art , the works included in this kind of production are for the most part associated with the use of computers , digital tools and information technologies .
Furthermore , a large number of authoritative voices among this specific field affirm that new media art is separated from what they consider the traditional art circuit .
Computer-generated art has been traditionally associated with artificial intelligence research , because of its peculiar procedural approach and also because this scientific research was predominantly discussed during the pioneering years of the use of computers in art. Artificial intelligence and the computing machine were generally regarded as the appropriate instruments to explore and understand peculiar human abilities such as intelligence , reasoning and consciousness .
The ambitious goals of artificial intelligence are not new : the synthetic reproduction of life has haunted the imagination of many artists , writers , composers and scientists through the centuries .
Such aspirations have been portrayed by a variety of works , from antique sculptures to
It is during the second half of the twentieth century that computer-generated art is recognized as an artistic practice .
artists evolving in this field started to develop a more critical and distanced approach .
This study examines some historic examples of computer-generated art to provide an understanding of this production and to offer a possible framework for discussing it today .
For what reasons do artists that currently use computing machines , together with the actors involved in the presentation of computer art , seem to favour a subversive and disruptive approach to computer technology and research ?
Can we identify some key moments that have contributed to shaping computer-generated art in this manner ?
Additionally , the question of the alleged separation of new media art - to which computer art is associated - from the traditional art circuit will also be considered .
Thereby , it aims to resolve a number of questions associated with this type of artistic production that is today a source of ongoing debate .
The works of researchers , philosophers and critical theorists will be discussed in the third chapter .
As a result , the perception and the study of a work of art require the examination of the field in which the work has been produced .
This approach allows me to position the work considered in a broader social , cultural and economical context .
As a consequence , I have decided to mainly work with specific and selected case studies .
The diversity of case studies considered reflects the complexity of the subject and the reality of the cultural field of new media art. They also provide an overview of the evolution of this kind of artistic production through the years .
The sources taken into account have been determined by each specific case : analysis of the artworks and related documents , interviews with artists and curators , analysis of texts and documents in the archives of institutions and museums .
To further complement my research , I have also been actively visiting and participating in exhibitions and symposiums related to new media art , which provided an invaluable insight into the field and the ongoing debates .
Furthermore , I also refer to the idea of Performative Kunstgeschichte , which considers the work of an art historian as being not only analytical but also performative .
This approach does not try to hide or disregard the subjectivity of the historian within the cultural field , but rather to assume it as a contributing and enriching element of the research .
As a guideline to conducting research , Siegfried Zielinski also emphasised the necessity of a purpose .
The first chapter addresses the historical and theoretical background of computergenerated art and its development within the new media art field .
The historical precedents of current generative art production are briefly presented through a concise history of works created from antiquity to modern times .
Subsequently , the definition of generative art is considered through the examination of some of the most frequently recurring ones , provided by prominent artists and historians .
The question of emergence , appearing as central in several definitions of generative art , will also be discussed .
Theories about emergence therefore constitute the theoretical framework in which works of generative art are more likely to be discussed .
Ultimately , the purpose of the first chapter is to attempt to constitute a possible framework in order to understand computer-generated art as an artistic production that belongs not only to the specific field of new media art but also to a larger discussion that concerns the relationship between the arts , technology and society .
The works discussed had to meet the current and broad definition of computer-generated art , while they also had to be sufficiently well known and discussed within the new media art field on an international scale .
In particular , the analysis of the artist 's writings and the analysis of the context of presentation of the works have been taken into account .
The digital divide discussed here must not be confused with that which concerns the disparity of access to the Internet between rich and poor countries .
their authors and their position regarding the scientific research associated with their work .
The third chapter examines the assimilation , within generative art , of the criticism addressed against computers and the artificial intelligence research prompted by the humanities and by part of the scientific community .
The positions of artists that have been actively discussing these topics , mirrored in the writings of philosophers and critical thinkers , will provide an understanding of some important debates surrounding computergenerated art during the eighties and the nineties .
This case study portrays an interesting example of participation by artists making use of computers in an important international contemporary art event .
It also coincides with the constitution and recognition of new media art as a distinct field of artistic production .
Additionally , the analysis of the participation of the artistic collective JODI within the tenth documenta exhibition provides an example of computer-generated art that differs greatly from the pioneering works discussed in the second chapter .
I will discuss the current perspective on computer-generated art and question whether it is still appropriate in light of my
Subsequently , I will discuss the alleged separation between new media art and the traditional art circuit and I will attempt to offer an unconventional perspective on this particular question .
This research will hopefully offer alternative perceptions and open up new debates regarding this kind of artistic production , in addition to providing a better understanding of the works examined and their context of presentation and discussion .
What is more , this study illustrates a thrilling history of opposing visions and opinions on how to contribute to the enlightenment of society through art and technology , and on whether this is the goal art should pursue .
Computer-generated art is frequently associated with a restricted group of works produced using computing devices and sophisticated algorithms , written in programming languages such as processing and vvvv that have been specifically conceived for graphic and artistic creation .
In fact , generative art - considered in its literal and broader definition - is a very old and varied artistic production , preceding the invention of a programmable electronic machine .
A good number of current works in generative art use computing machines and programming languages .
For this reason , it has been customary to inscribe this type of artistic production within the history of mechanical sculptures and automata .
Automata have been produced in different countries and civilisations since antiquity .
The art of animating clocks with automated figures spread across the continent throughout the centuries .
The digesting duck created by Jacques de Vaucanson , supposedly not only imitating the natural movements of a duck but its digestive system as well , is probably the most famous and somehow mythical example .
The story is probably a legend , but it is commonly recounted to portray the growing interest in the artificial imitation of life and the speculation concerning a mechanical approach to life and nature in modern times .
An example is the controversial essay by Julien Offray de La Mettrie , L’Homme Machine .
Not surprisingly , the author mentions the automata created by Vaucanson to document his description of the human being as a complex machine .
They also mention the ongoing research of cyberneticists Norbert Wiener , Warren Sturgis McCulloch , and William Ross Ashby - who provide a mechanist model of the functioning of the brain - suggesting that their research might open new developments in the building of future automata .
In the twentieth century , the production of automata was associated with the invention of electricity and the possibilities of telecommunication .
At the end of his historical survey , Heudin analyses several recurring arguments opposing the development of research in robotics and the quest for the creation of artificial life .
implementation of robots in our society is the prelude of an inevitable evolution in which men and machines will peacefully coexist and collaborate .
The fascination for automata and the possibility to imitate life-like behaviours through mechanical objects is thus an obsession that runs through the centuries and not only in western culture .
Today , a large variety of robots exist : spectacular objects of entertainment and advertising such as Asimo are probably the closest product to the general representation of what a robot should be and look like .
If the history of automata leads to the recent developments in cybernetics and robotics , while allowing artists to experiment with these technologies , the history of generative art is not restricted to the production of mechanical sculptures and devices .
Generative practices are not only found in works of visual arts , they are found in a variety of different artistic productions that range from architecture to music to literature .
In the eighteenth-century , composer and music theorist Johann Philipp Kirnberger experimented with the possibilities of using mathematical and casual rules to generate music,36 leading to the practice of the Musikalisches Würfelspiel , a system to compose minuets and polonaises with the use of a dice .
The Musical Dice game has fascinated many composers since the end of the eighteenth century , but the experiments to compose with casual and accidental elements is not limited to the use of dice : the famous sonatas and interludes for prepared pianos created by John Cage are a renowned example in contemporary music.37 Eventually , music composition integrated the use of computing machines and a growing number of music theorists and composers further
Fahrer’s observations regarding the cut-up technique in literature seem to challenge the common perspective that considers generative approaches , applied in artistic production , in light of a long established constructive relationship between art and technology .
From the legendary origins of the Corinthian capital to modern organic architecture , nature has always played an inspiring role .
During the second half of the twentieth-century , the evolutionary forms of nature appealed to architects , who were interested in using the computing power of machines to analyse and reproduce these forms through specific algorithms .
Nicholas Negroponte , co-founder of the MIT Media Lab , was an enthusiastic forerunner in the use of computers within the field of design and architecture .
Most of his works reflect on the opportunities to apply artificial intelligence to architecture , and on the potential to foster a dialogue between the architect and the machine , as in his project URBAN5 .
Negroponte regarded the implementation of machine intelligence in architecture as a way to foster a humanistic approach .
In his view , machines must be capable of learning and evolving in order to effectively contribute to architecture , instead of simply performing automatized tasks .
More recently , a variety of architects have been experimenting with a large array of generative tools such as evolutionary algorithms and swarm intelligence to create new forms and develop new architectural techniques of construction .
They carried out a series of experiments in the construction of walls and modules , by adding or subtracting materials .
Quite significantly , Soddu stresses the interdisciplinary potential of generative art allowing for collaboration among researchers and artists from a variety of fields .
The role played by computers in the development of generative art in music and architecture has been significant .
However , computing machines and robots were not the only possible way of creating generative works of art , some notable examples can be found in painting and sculpture .
Generative processes are still used today in artistic production and are found in works that encompasses a variety of techniques including internet-based practices , interactive works and even biotechnologies .
Their influence on artistic production and their conceptual and aesthetic qualities have had such an impact in the new media art field that they have been presented widely in art festivals , museums and publications .
With time , these projects have been regarded as works of art in their own right .
This brief historical overview reveals that generative approaches in art are an old practice that still exists and continues to evolve today .
Furthermore , it shows that generative art has very often been regarded as an artistic production that exemplifies the intersection between art , science and technology .
The relationship between computers and generative approaches has been so strong , that generative art has been used as a general term to simply describe the use of computers in art in the emerging years.55 Nevertheless , the definition of the distinctive attributes characteristic of a work of generative art is an ongoing debate .
While art historians and critics have mostly examined the position of computergenerated art within the dialogue between the arts and science , many artists , architects and musicians actively involved in this field have proposed and discussed a variety of
The definition proposed by Galanter has been cited in many publications and papers on generative art. It has the advantage of clearly defining the requirements of a work to be generative while , at the same time , being quite broad in scope .
According to this definition , a work of generative art can be made of any material and can represent anything , as far as it has been produced using a system that functions in a procedural way with some degree of autonomy .
If the definition doesn’t specify the necessary characteristics of the resulting work of art , it prescribes some necessary qualities to the system , which must be of a procedural sort and work with a degree of autonomy .
Gallanter is not restrictive about the nature of the system itself , any system that the artist builds or chooses to work with could be used to create generative art : from computing machines , to a set of rules of natural language .
A large production of works is inscribed in this definition , from the most recent works of digital art to the previously mentioned work by Jean Tinguely and Hans Haacke , for example .
The definition stresses again the procedural method and the use of a system in order to generate forms .
Generative art describes a method or strategy , rather than a specific style or medium of work .
Although Watz does not exclude other possibilities and alternative ‘systems’ from his definition , he puts emphasis on the fact that generative art is today associated with software-based art. The artist also stresses that generative works are mostly abstract and visually complex .
His definition has therefore the merit of offering a qualitative description of works of generative art. Another point worth mentioning is that Watz regards both the output produced by the system and the system itself , as part of the work .
Although most of the definitions and criteria for examining generative art are put forward by artists involved in this kind of artistic production , the issue has also been explored by some important media art critics .
context , namely the use of computing machines , evolutionary algorithms and digital programs to produce works of abstract art. Susanne Jaschko proposed an interesting analysis of this artistic production and provided an alternative definition .
In this definition , generative art refers to an art practice where the artist creates a process by the means of a computer program executed by the machine itself .
In her talk , Jaschko acknowledges the limitation of using the expression generative art to such a strict spectrum of production and mentions the broader definition proposed by Galanter .
Yet , she engages in some aesthetic considerations within this stricter perspective .
The output of the work , be it a video screening or a digital print , is what most viewers will experience of the work .
She acknowledges that generative art is double in nature and necessitates appreciation not only of the visual output , but also of the underlying code generating the work of art and thereby concludes that the main output of a generative work is indeed retinal .
where both the system and the output are part of a single work , but where each of them need to be appreciated with a very distinct act of perception and aesthetic judgment .
If the code needs to be appreciated for its conceptual elegance , the output needs to be appreciated for its formal properties .
Its closeness to design is as suspicious as its widespread neglect of media critique or self-reference that is so popular within media art."62 These considerations are extremely important : they not only offer criteria for the evaluation of generative art but they also offer some reflections concerning the status and the perspectives of this production within the new media art field .
The provocative argument put forward by Jaschko primarily addresses artistic productions that strongly focuses on generative approaches .
However , in her analysis there is also an underlying critique addressing the media art field itself .
In this respect , British artist Matt Pearson offers some reflections that seem to manifest the will to bridge the gap between the retinal and the conceptual qualities .
Although this is accurate and descriptive—and a long sentence with all the right words—a single phrase like this isn’t enough .
In my mind , GenArt is just another by-product of the eternal titanic battle between the forces of chaos and order trying to work out their natural harmony , as expressed in a 63 ballet of light and pixels .
Programming is an interface between man and machine ; it’s a clean , logical discipline , with clearly defined aims .
Art is an emotional subject , highly subjective and defying definition .
This definition is particularly interesting because it associates the specific artistic qualities of generative art with the subversion of the mechanical and rational properties of the system used .
It is also worth noting that the author considers generative art as the meeting point between art and programming , confirming a general vision that regards computer-generated art as a discipline that bridges the arts and the sciences .
While he stresses the importance of an intuitive comprehension of generative art , Pearson nonetheless adds some more objective properties .
Emergence is a concept that many other artists and critics dealing with generative art have recognised and acknowledged its playing an important role in their research .
It is the concept that explains the crucial leap it makes between non-life and life."66 Furthermore , Whitelaw suggests that emergence is what drives an artist to create works of artificial-life and even what makes these works worthy of being considered within an artistic approach .
This is possibly the strongest thesis in his research : I will argue that emergence is not merely central to the mechanics of a-life practice but represents its primary interest and its dominant drive , that 67 emergence is to a significant extent the reward that draws artists to use a-life .
The concept of emergence appears in almost every essay discussing works of generative art. It recurs in several definitions of generative art and it is regarded by many as the ultimate goal and driving force for artists engaging in this kind of production .
Because artists and historians deem the concept of emergence as being critical to understanding and evaluating works of generative art , it is therefore important to examine this concept in detail .
The description offered by Aristotle is nonetheless very general and the concept evolved over the course of the last century with contributions from both philosophers and researchers .
Not only does Mill apply the phenomenon of emergence to more complex organisms , he also considers life as an emerging property that cannot be explained by mechanical laws alone .
life savours of vitalism."74 According to Kim , the association of the concept of emergence to vitalism is the reason why philosophers of the twenty-century quickly discarded it .
It is only in recent times that emergence was again considered in a new light by younger philosophers , especially in the effort to explain problems related to the body-mind separation within a physicalist approach .
In his attempt to classify and illustrate the variety of approaches on emergence , Robert Van Gulick distinguishes between metaphysical relations and epistemic relations .
different in kind from those had by its parts , and 2 .
of a kind whose nature and existence is not necessitated by the features of its parts , their mode of combination and the lawlike regularities governing the features of its parts."75 Van Gulick seems sceptical about the existence of such radical kinds of emerging properties and causal powers , believing that it would challenge some fundamental physicalist assumptions .
Indeed , the concept of emergence has been influential within the scientific research that evolved from cybernetics .
The faith in the possibility of strong emergence has been a compelling drive for artificial intelligence research and emerging behaviours have been predicted from the start .
Partly responsible for the proliferation of such speculations was the article written by mathematician Alan Turing describing a possible test , today known as the ‘Turing test’ , to resolve whether or not a machine could be considered intelligent.77 The article generated a vast literature not only in computer science but in philosophy as well,78 and provided a concrete goal for many researchers in the field .
Although the concept of emergence has not always been explicitly employed by AI researchers , it was nevertheless embedded in their visions and predictions .
It is in more recent fields of embodied robotics and artificial life , that the concept of emergence became particularly important .
The ' key ' concept in AL is emergent behaviour."80 The new-born field of artificial life , which would have an even greater influence on artistic production than artificial intelligence , was largely relying on the research by Chilean biologists Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela .
If the concept of emergence has been analytically discussed by philosophers and applied by researchers of different fields to explain and justify their research , it is today a concept that still fascinates as much as it generates opposing positions .
Science historian George Dyson illustrates quite vividly the problematic ambiguity related to the concept of emergence at the end of the twenty-century : The emergence of life and intelligence from less-alive and less-intelligent components has happened at least once .
Emergent behavior is that which cannot be predicted through analysis at any level simpler than that of the system as a whole .
Explanations of emergence , like simplifications of complexity , are inherently illusory and can only be achieved by sleight of hand .
Confused and varied as it might be , the concept of emergence had a strong impact on artistic production , as already acknowledged by Mitchell Whitelaw .
Several artists creating generative works of art were confronted with the concept of emergence and even contributed to it with their own ideas and observations .
There has been a great deal of debate about what constitutes emergent systems , but they are typically described as having some kind of order , structure or intelligence that is not pre-determined .
Later in the article , Jane Prophet admits that her means to create emerging systems in her work follows a bottom-up approach , which has been decisive to the research in both embodied robotics and artificial life .
The concept of emergence plays a central role in the works of many other important figures of new media art engaging in generative processes .
The work and the writings of the British artist reflect the ambitious goal to merge art and modern technologies in order to move society forward .
The concept of emergence , important in many scientific disciplines , seems to have provided a suitable bridge to finally connect the arts and the sciences .
The term ‘new media art’ used to designate this field , is a recent one : many current art historians and critics concerned with this type of artistic production recognise its application , though they admit its ambiguity .
The term ‘new’ within the label ‘new media art’ is probably the most problematic element .
Nevertheless , many professionals working in this field regret the limited exchanges and interactions between new media art and the traditional art world .
Delineating narratives within the history of art is a common and recurring effort among art historians ; on the other hand , some artists have been reluctant to accept their inscription in such narratives .
Some examples are the Ars Electronica Festival in Linz , Transmediale in Berlin , Zentrum für Kunst und Medientechnologie in Karlsruhe and the international Ph.D .
In his encompassing publication Information Art - today a point of reference concerning the intersection of art , science and technology - artist and Professor Stephen Wilson presents a large variety of artists and works associated with scientific research .
In the chapter addressing themes in digital art such as artificial intelligence , artificial life and telerobotics - the media art historian and curator affirms that many artists working with these technologies have been influenced by the ideas of researchers such as Norbert Wiener and Richard Dawkins .
She also considers that the artistic projects in artificial life can contribute to a better understanding of the nature of life and intelligence .
By discussing some examples of artificial life , Christiane Paul suggests that the artistic productions involved with the use of computers not only provide a link between the arts and the sciences , but through research they also contribute to the body of knowledge within this field .
The Italian art historian Gianna Maria Gatti identifies the roots of artificial life at the end of the sixties , within the research on neural networks and artificial intelligence .
Artists operating in the sphere of Artificial Life also make reference to neural networks .
The fact that these nets are inspired directly by the brain - by a part of the body of the living organism - makes them count among the models of Artificial Life .
Eventually , Gianna Maria Gatti incorporates the recent artistic production by means of biotechnologies in the tradition of artificial life , thus providing an encompassing narrative that spans from the earlier artistic research in artificial intelligence to the recent works of bio-art .
The communication between men and machines can , in her opinion , further contribute to this progress .
Artificial life is the focus of the research by art historian and artist Mitchell Whitelaw , who provided a comprehensive compilation and cataloguing of different works of this kind .
Whitelaw also uses the general terms of new media art within which he inscribes this artistic production .
Oliver Grau inscribes the artistic research related to virtual reality within a tradition of artistic production that originated with the phantasmagoria spectacles .
He inscribes the works of these artists within the narrative that he has drawn from the phantasmagoria spectacles of the late eighteenth century onward .
In his opinion , the peculiarity of artificial life is to create an interactive image space powered by a genetic algorithm in order to generate the illusion of a biologically populated space .
Through the concept of phantasmagoria , Oliver Grau provides thus a link that encompasses artificial intelligence , artificial life and virtual reality into a possible narrative .
Complementing art research on robotics and artificial intelligence , artists have embraced the relatively new field of artificial life .
To provide a narrative is to provide a framework to consider works , texts and events in a particular light .
The previous examples - describing the ways prominent art critics and historians have decided to group the works of artists that engage with artificial intelligence , artificial life and even biotechnologies together - further illustrate that among some of the most influential actors in the field of media art , some bridges and similarities between artistic positions have been recognized .
There are indeed many analogies between the works that will be discussed in the following chapters : all rely on the use of computing machines and the possibilities of imitating or reproducing behaviours commonly associated with living beings .
What is more , the majority of critics and historians have conceded that generative art offers the opportunity to create a link between the arts and the sciences .
Many influential art historians and critics were keen to write a narrative that links works of computer and generative art to research in artificial intelligence , artificial life and biotechnologies .
This specific cluster of works that share the use of computer and generative principles to create emerging behaviours are part of the media art field .
It is in the exhibitions , festivals , institutions and publications dedicated to new media art that one is likely to find references and discussions about generative art. But what are the relations of this specific form of artistic production to the field of contemporary art ?
This question has occupied art historians and critics involved with new media art since the consolidation of this particular field in the nineties and is still highly debated today .
Indeed , there seems to be a general consensus that new media art is separated from the contemporary art field .
While emphasising the lack of interest for new and digital media in the traditional circuit of contemporary art , the author supports the thesis that a divide between media art and the traditional contemporary art field exists .
These few examples illustrate how some of the most important critics and curators engaged in media art today seem to agree that there is a separation between the field in which they work and the traditional contemporary art field .
However , they do n't simply acknowledge this divide , they also offer arguments in order to explain it .
What are the arguments that are commonly put forward , in this sense ?
Among the arguments , a recurring explanation that is almost unanimously endorsed is the lack of market for new media art , what I propose to define as the ‘economic argument’ .
The fact that there are very few dedicated galleries creating a market for works of new media art is considered a significant factor in its difficulty with gaining access to the traditional art world .
Therefore , media art is largely cut off from the commercial circuit of art , which allegedly plays an essential role in the traditional contemporary art field .
favoured by the market."111 Bishop supports her argument by stressing that visual art and its market are inherently attached to intellectual property and physicality .
The economic argument has been mentioned many times before to justify the separation of digital based works from the traditional art field .
The dominance of the financial imperatives is again the reason why this artistic scene is largely self-organized."112 Hence , Isabelle Graw not only affirmed the difficulty of artists working with new medias to sell their works , but she also attributed the dominance of the market in the traditional contemporary art field as the reason why media artists are obliged to create their own field .
Dass der Komplex Finanzierung dominiert , ist erneut darauf zurückzuführen , dass diese Szene weitgehend selbst organisiert ist .
In her article , Verena Kuni principally focuses on presenting the difficulties that she faced while engaging in digital culture from a historical perspective .
Among the reasons cited , the economic difficulties of the digitally based artistic production played a role .
But the art historian adds an important element to the economic argument that presents the difficulties faced by artists that wish to sell their works .
If the private galleries and collectors rely on the visibility of works in public spaces to enhance their value , the public institutions rely on the number of visitors to obtain subsidies .
The art historian concludes that in this entangled , strategic game , web-based artworks have been eventually left aside .
The argument by Verena Kuni brings thus a wider and more complex perspective to the economic argument supporting the digital divide .
In his opinion , therefore , the economic argument alone cannot justify the digital divide .
Edward Shanken also supports the economic argument and recognizes the intricate and influential game of interconnections that bind private and public institutions to the art market .
The argument can be summarized as follows : because a critical discourse on new media art necessitates a particular knowledge of its history and its techniques , the art historians and critics that are trained within the traditional contemporary art field lack the capacities to approach new media art works , hence they tend to ignore this specific artistic production in their curatorial or critical approaches .
This argument is strongly supported by Simon Penny , an artist who produced notable works that exploited principles of embodied robotics and who is also very active from a theoretical perspective in discussing this kind of artistic production .
The kind of art criticism typified by the connoisseurship model is inappropriate and inadequate here .
In this passage , Penny clearly affirms the inadequacy of traditional historical and aesthetic approaches while implicitly suggesting a lack of specific competences in the traditional art world .
Such works seldom fit in the conventional cultural milieu of the museum/gallery/private collection , but are often immersed in a radically new kind of dispersed digital simultaneity – the net .
The title itself tackles the idea of a distance between the artistic approaches discussed in the book and the traditional concept of art. The competence argument surfaces in this book , as well .
If Shanken agrees with other media art critics that a lack of competences is detrimental to fully appreciating the new media art works , on the other he invites traditional art critics to nevertheless appreciate the conceptual qualities of these works .
The lack of commercial interest in new media art works and the lack of competences in the traditional art field to approach media art , are without doubt the most recurring arguments used to justify the digital divide .
The German art historian Verena Kuni explained the difficulty of approaching digital and media art from a historical perspective .
The difficulty in conserving media art works is the topic of an ongoing discussion .
The arguments that Verena Kuni puts forward in her article , not only point out the difficulty of conservation , but also the consequences of such difficulties for art historians and their careers .
Because of the ephemeral character of media art works and the lack of dedicated archival institutions , many art historians are discouraged from specialising in new media and digital art works .
Another argument , concerning the interactive quality of many media and digital art works , is put forward by curator and historian Christiane Paul .
It is not the opinion of Christiane Paul , who stresses that the traditional museum audience is rather accustomed to a passive relationship with artworks and is likely discouraged from engaging in works that demand a higher level of interaction .
In her opinion , curators and directors of many museums consider it a challenge to present works that demand interactivity , such as media and digital artworks .
Because traditional art works tend to be more successful in appealing to a more traditional audience , and because of the imperative of institutions to record a higher number of visitors , Christiane Paul concludes that compared to more traditional works new media and digital art is disadvantaged when it comes to the possibility of being presented in prestigious institutions .
If most of the arguments previously discussed tend to put the blame on the traditional art field , Edward Shanken offers a last argument that partly blames the new media artists and curators .
Some blame must be placed on the artists themselves , many of whom lack traditional art training and have cultivated little sensitivity to and experience with the materials and techniques of MCA installation and exhibition practices .
Critics and historians have not focused enough attention on theorizing across borders .
NMA curators must master the conventions of MCA if they are to succeed in exhibiting NMA in that context and must be able to make connections between works made in both fields .
By the same token , MCA curators who are unfamiliar with NMA and the technical and spatial considerations that it demands are ill-prepared to create compelling exhibitions .
In this argument , Edward Shanken affirms that many artists and curators working within the new media art field ignore the dynamics and the strategies , as well as the language of the traditional art world .
This is the reverse of the competence argument , addressed instead this time to the media art field .
Because of their lack of competences in the usages and norms that regulate the traditional art world , new media artists and curators are unable to professionally and successfully position themselves in the traditional field .
Another important point to consider is that , with very few exceptions , the arguments previously discussed implicitly suggest that the digital divide is unfortunate and detrimental to the new media and digital artistic production .
Although this statement is not explicitly expressed , the idea that media and digital art suffers from the exclusion from the traditional field of art is constantly elicited in the considerations concerning the exclusion from the market and from the most prestigious exhibitions and events associated with the traditional art field .
Are the arguments offered by the critics providing an exhaustive explanation of the claimed digital divide ?
Is it really the case that this separation is detrimental to the media and digital arts ?
These questions will be reconsidered in the concluding chapter , after the analysis of some specific cases of computer-generated art works and their context of presentation .
In this sense , computer-generated art has often been regarded as a production that bridges the gap between the humanities and the sciences .
Has the concept of emergence always been the focus of the artists ?
Have they changed their position , particularly with regard to the scientific research with which their work has been associated ?
Computergenerated art is a paradigmatic example through which one can investigate the dialogue between artistic production and the scientific research , as has been outlined here .
Of particular interest is the position of the artists with regard to the impact of the computing machine within society .
Computer-generated art is , furthermore , a suitable lens through which to consider the problematic relationship between the fields of new media art and contemporary art.
At the end of the sixties , computing machines were becoming popular not only within scientific research but also in the art world .
His remark is an implicit recognition of the digital divide .
Because many historians involved in the field of digital and media art today regard Harold Cohen and Edward Ihnatowicz as seminal reference points for early computer art , an analysis of their works can provide a better understanding of positions toward the computing machine and its associated scientific research during the pioneering years of this kind of artistic production .
They both have created works in which the machine plays an essential part and supplemented their artistic research with publications that provided extremely interesting ideas , perspectives and reflections not only on their artistic vision and activities , but also concerning epistemological questions .
These works are described in their specific context , including the presentation to the public , their reception and the larger cultural context in which the works where produced .
More significantly , I have focused on the intention of the artists by analysing their written articles and interviews .
What drove Ihnatowicz and Cohen to turn to computing machines to develop their work and research ?
What was their perspective towards the advancements of the scientific research with which they have been associated ?
How has their work been received by critics and journalists ?
Cohen put aside his activity as a traditional painter and concentrated on programming , learning basic languages like Ditiran and Fortran .
Subsequently , he created a specific computer program capable of independently producing drawings , a program that would become the cornerstone of his future artistic career .
It is not the purpose of this research to recount the life of Harold Cohen .
Nevertheless , the fact that this particular moment in his career is often acknowledged by historians and by the artist himself,131 highlights how the use of computers in an artistic context was perceived as a difficult , audacious and even alienating choice for an artist .
To engage with computers was regarded as unconventional , in particular for an artist associated with the traditional activity of painting .
The manufacturing of the digital divide seems to have been prepared before the recognition of the new media art field itself .
Cohen’s experiments with machines resulted in the creation of AARON , a work that can today be considered his most famous and ambitious ; a work that he has since continued to develop , modify and improve .
However , the question of how to define it as an artwork might pose some problems .
The hardware changed over the decades and the program evolved .
Not only did Harold Cohen create a program to challenge the activity of image making , he also wrote many articles in which he described his artistic research , the capacities of AARON and his speculations on topics associated with computing machines and artificial intelligence .
Is it really the case that the artist abandoned painting for programming ?
What were the preoccupations that guided his artistic research with machines ?
During the years that followed his visit and residency in San Diego , Cohen produced works that relied on the use of computers , together with more traditional hand-made drawings .
It is interesting to consider some of the hand drawings , within the collection , made by the artist during the same years in which he started experimenting with computers .
They are also organised and connected together , as if to depict structures that could be found in the natural world .
The shapes - often circular , irregular and almost organic - are representative of a characteristic hand-made drawing and are easily recognised as being made by a human author .
If we compare these works with the first documented work within the collection generated with a computer by the artist , the similarities with the hand-made drawings are striking .
Harold Cohen seems to have continued his formal research developed in his drawings and paintings with the use of the computer .
In this work , exclusively created by the machine , the artist approached the fundamental problem of organizing lines within the space delimited by the surface of the paper .
appears that the lines are composed of several dots produced by a plotter .
The forms created by the computer in this drawing present many analogies to the precedent handmade drawings of the artist .
The lines are not simply connected to each other in some nodal points : they are organised together to produce closed , circular figures .
Instead of transforming the abstract organic-like shapes into recognisable forms , the artist has simply highlighted the forms produced by the computer program , filling the spaces with different colours .
It is clear that the colouring activity of the artist is not intended to modify the work of the computer , nor is the work of the computer a simple background upon which the artist freely creates a new painting .
The purpose of the colouring is really to emphasise the forms generated by the program , something that Cohen did manually until he managed to write a program capable of autonomously handling colours .
The Amsterdam Suite presents a further development of computer-generated images , with a wider variety of shapes , figures and motifs .
The drawings are still abstract , and most of their elements are very simple - a
The series demonstrates that the program is capable of generating a variety of patterns that could be organised in more complex compositions .
The early drawings produced by Cohen with his computer program are clearly a further development of his previous research , as a painter .
With the computing machine , the artist investigates the production of forms , the organisation of space and the basic elements that constitute the representation of images of greater complexity .
On the other hand , these early drawings are the premises for the further development of the works produced by AARON .
The artist made clear that the machine did not have any information about the world whatsoever .
If figures and shapes are recognisable to the viewers in the early drawings , this was not the purpose of the artist .
However , the fact that figures and shapes might be recognised in a drawing generated by a machine that does not have any empiric knowledge of the objects it creates , is considered by the artist as an interesting way to investigate the possibility of creating an image that can carry a symbolic representation .
Simply put , AARON is a computer program hosted in a computing machine that generates drawings through a printing device .
Many definitions can be found in the artist 's essays .
AARON is a knowledge-based program , in which knowledge of image making is represented in rule form .
Cohen affirmed that , although some of AARON’s knowledge could be considered declarative and that it doesn’t behave randomly , it is also not producing paintings that are pre-programmed as such by the author of the code .
At first look , there is no actual reason not to consider AARON to be really creative , if by creativity one simply defines the activity of producing a drawing or a painting .
Such is the case when the word is used to describe , for example , a talented and inventive person .
For Cohen , computer programming was not an instrument to facilitate and automatize the production of paintings .
Rather , for Cohen programming was intended to be a work in its own right .
The decision to work with a machine inevitably raised several questions : not least , the commonly debated question of originality and authenticity .
Who is the author of the paintings generated by AARON , the computer or the man behind the program ?
Is the program itself a work of art or are only its drawings and paintings ?
Is AARON to be considered a unique work in progress , together with all its productions of drawings and paintings , or is every single version of AARON a distinct work of art ?
All of these elements are catalogued by the museum with a number , a description and a picture and have been stored and labelled for historical and conservational needs .
It also went through different stages and has been constantly modified .
In several articles , Cohen explicitly stated that AARON is the program , not the hardware hosting it .
The images of the installation are found in the catalogue , which also presents the description and the diagram of the whole system .
His name is mentioned on the work with a dedication note.141 The analysis of the early production of AARON reveals that Cohen was interested mostly in the question of the genesis of forms .
The use of computing machines and programming was indeed coupled with further investigations on creativity , symbolic representation and the difference between machines and human beings .
What exactly were the artist’s preoccupations and , more particularly , how did the artist position himself within the context of the use of computers in an artistic field ?
The following chapter analyses the articles in which Cohen seeks to understand his personal perspective regarding these questions .
The use of a computing machine marked a turning point in Cohen’s research , although he did not use the computer as a graphical tool , nor did he intend to challenge the concept of art and originality .
As exemplified by his works produced in the seventies , Cohen researched the act of drawing in greater detail and therefore further developed his previous artistic explorations .
His use of programming languages was a means by which to enquire the question of creativity through a machine .
I discovered eventually that I was not alone in my attitude , though my cobelievers were not in the art world .
This passage informs us that Cohen was moved by the urge to understand the functioning of the human mind .
Additionally , the artist draws a clear parallel with the artificial intelligence research and highlights how the encounter with Professor Edward Feigenbaum facilitated his understanding of programming .
He also communicates his purpose : to make programs that simulate the behaviours of humans as they engage in creative activities such as drawing .
This passage alone would suggest that the artist was quite in concordance with artificial intelligence research , something that he would disregard in later articles .
In these articles , he explains and describes the functioning of the program and his work .
and the similarities and differences between a hand-made drawing and a computergenerated one .
In addition , he tackles questions related to consciousness , intentionality and artificial intelligence .
Through the analysis of these articles , it is possible to understand Cohen 's ideas and concerns as he developed AARON during the early years .
Here again , the artist stresses how his intention is to understand the human activity of drawing through experimentation with a machine .
Cohen admits that such question is difficult to solve and that any answer would in turn be dependant on the very idea of human behaviour and machine behaviour .
But we should examine the implications behind this answer with some care , since it appears to involve the question of whether a machine might be capable of non-deterministic behaviour .
I have some doubt whether any definitive answer can be given to this question : whatever more rigorous definitions of the term ' nondeterministic ' might be available in other disciplines , it seems to me that here it relates to what we think human behaviour is like at least as much as 144 it does to what we think machine behaviour is like .
According to the artist , a machine must be understood in its own language and terms .
This seems to be particularly true , according to the artist , when dealing with questions of images and colours .
Nevertheless , the artist does not believe that a machine need to be embodied in a physical environment in order to deal with image-making and being able to produce objects in the physical world , objects that can challenge our ideas about art and creativity .
For this reason , he concludes that the conception of a machine imitating a creative activity such as drawing does not necessitate the reproduction of peculiar human abilities such as perception .
In this article , the artist carefully and precisely explains the functioning of a computing machine .
Human sometimes rely on random acts to take decisions , such as throwing a dice on a table or a sponge on a canvas to create unpredictable patterns , while a machine will always follow an order .
Consequently , Cohen suggests that machines have the potential to couple this decision-making process with the ability to weight the results and modify the parameters that allow the program to make the decisions .
He further investigates concepts of creativity , protocol and feedback .
Here again , the artist clearly affirms his purpose : The point of the strategy — the building of a computer program — was not to see whether the presence of these behavioral primitives would add a sense of authenticity to the output .
It was to see whether the program could generate image-rich material in a controlled context where it would be clear that the 148 effect was not the result of something else .
What is particularly interesting in this article is that , to support his observations , Cohen examines and describes the behaviours of real human beings when they draw .
He repeats the same exercise with his art students , some of them being older and having many years of experience .
He also analyses the reasoning of his daughters and his students to try to understand if they followed any rules when deciding whether to connect the dots on the paper , or not .
Cohen concluded that all the people involved in the experiment were acting in accordance with a limited set of recurring rules .
see if you can see an image in the dots , and if so draw a line around it : 2 .
drawing , relies for the most part on processes that do not necessitate these metaphors to be explained .
It is interesting to observe how the artist refers to the concept of feedback as an explanation of the necessary process in the activity of drawing .
Feedback is a central concept in cybernetics , fundamental to the research of Norbert Wiener , whose work has greatly influenced research in computer science and robotics .
The artist uses this concept to partly explain the functioning of drawing , as many other human activities , and thus to bridge the distance between men and machines .
The article develops a precise description of the functioning of his computer program .
As the artist explains , AARON is based on a hierarchical system organised by a group of protocols that mostly relies on the ' if-then ' series of command , a rather basic feature of programming languages for decision-making .
In this article , Cohen admits that his knowledge of the activity of drawing relies on a long artistic career , something that has certainly influenced his approach to experimenting with computers .
The artist stresses once more that the machine was never instructed to reproduce a particular drawing , nor was it fed with a specific drawing made by the artist as a starting point .
The program does not rely on any kind of input or data to produce drawings : the creation of the drawing by the machine is the result of a process of choices , in which the ' if-then ' command plays an important part .
Nevertheless , he concedes that some parallel can be drawn .
The program is provided with knowledge of animals from a structural point of view : for example , it has a set of instructions concerning the articulation of limbs .
It has become apparent that the programming structures 154 it employs will not lead to that end .
This assertion suggests that the artist is aiming at devising a truly creative machine .
In the conclusion of the article , Cohen elaborates on some suggestions for the conception of a program that could reproduce a more efficient creative behaviour .
He names the hypothetical program AARON 2 , and he describes the features that the program would have to fulfil in order to be considered creative .
However , at the time of the publishing , the artist does not seem to exclude the possibility that creativity could in the future be attributed to machines in general and to his program in particular .
This passage could be regarded as Cohen 's personal definition of emerging behaviour , quite a demanding definition and a rather optimistic prediction for a computer program .
Over the course of the succeeding decades , his position towards computer and artificial intelligence will nevertheless reconsider these optimistic predictions .
In this early phase , the artist was mainly addressing problems such as the ability of the machine to differentiate between figure and background , between open and closed forms and between inner and outer surfaces .
machine that would record its own information , were some of the artist’s objectives during this period of time , as attested by his own early articles .
There is n't a fundamental difference between saying I know something and saying I know the rules for doing something .
What the production system represents is the 158 rules for image-making .
Indeed , it is worth noting that this single entry was in fact penned by Cohen himself whose contribution was the result of an invitation .
The computer scientist Edward A. Feigenbaum , professor at Stanford University , was solicited to write an introduction on the work of the artist for the publication .
In addition , she reported that it is in particular the ‘ifthen-(else)’ program command that inspired him to write the application to create drawings , while he was learning to program .
McCorduck concedes that her book is the result of a long encounter and discussion with Cohen .
developments in artificial life , a development that discarded symbolic representation .
This statement is essential to understanding Cohen’s approach , not only in regard to his opinions toward scientific research , but also concerning his preoccupations with developing a computer program in an artistic context .
And this is also the reason why he kept rewriting his program , trying new directions to further investigate the nature of image-making and attempting new solutions in dealing with forms and colours .
During the eighties and nineties , a decade after AARON was first created , the printed works present a clear evolution towards figurative and realistic shapes .
Furthermore , the forms started to be coherently organised in interiors or in landscapes displaying organic elements .
At first , the artist personally applied colours by hand to the printed works , he later decided that AARON should be able to deal with colours independently .
It is only at the beginning of the nineties , that he expressly confronted the difficulty of instructing AARON to autonomously deal with colours .
At the turn of the millennium , AARON started producing abstract works displaying a large array of colours .
However , the problem of colouring brought the artist to reconsider his formal position regarding intelligence and the way to program a creative machine .
In a sense , Harold Cohen didn’t entirely give up painting when he turned to computers and programming : painting , drawing and creativity in general were precisely the subject of his investigations while he conceived and constantly reprogrammed AARON .
involvement with Artificial Intelligence : I surely cannot deny my fellowship with that , can I ?
I know where I stand with respect to Artificial Intelligence .
I also know the difference between a name that differentiates and a 166 label that prevents differentiation .
In an email exchange , I had the opportunity to question him on his position regarding artificial intelligence , as well as the debate opposing top-down versus bottom-up approaches .
That argument took me off the standard top-down AI vector ; I did n't see how modelling the human colorist was possible .
Harold Cohen developed a very unique and personal research project : he learned to use computer languages such as Fortran , C and Lisp to produce his own program in order to approach the question of image making .
In doing so , he coherently continued his own activity of painting and his inquiry into the fundamental elements of an image and what it means to create a drawing .
What is undoubtedly unique about Cohen , is the consistency with which he modified and improved the written program in order to progress in his artistic and epistemological research .
For the artist , his work was not simply an opportunity to produce drawings , it was first and foremost a means to deepen the understanding of the activity of drawing and the production of meaningful forms .
Cohen was inspired and certainly influenced by artificial intelligence research , although he did not fully associate with its ideology and methodology and preferred to develop his own approach .
research was deeply theoretical , epistemological , and aimed at contributing to a better understanding of the functioning of human activities such as creativity and imagemaking through the use of the machine and programming languages .
However conceptual and epistemological his research has been , his focus remains nonetheless inscribed within artistic production and the understanding of the activity of drawing .
Cohen clearly expressed his motivations and his position concerning the use of machines in an artistic context in his articles .
How has his work and his ideas been discussed by critics and curators ?
Before he started experimenting with machines and programming , Harold Cohen received favourable critique for his paintings .
Herbert Fancke , Jasia Reichardt and Jack Burnham are specialists in the field of computer art at the time when Cohen creates his first drawings .
It is not surprising that the artist and his work generate a positive reaction among them .
A position that tends to suggest that the average artistic production made with computers , despite the novelty of the phenomenon during the seventies , did n't completely convince even such specialists in the field .
Some of the catalogues published during these exhibitions do not propose a critical text .
The catalogue produced on the occasion of the exhibition at the Stedeljik Museum only reproduce a dialogue between the artist and his wife , Becky Cohen .
They are not drawings that Cohen has made and then instructed a computer to reproduce or permute .
They are original drawings by the 173 computer which , in a sense , makes up its own mind what to do next .
It is worth noting that Andrew Forge stresses the humanistic aspect of Cohen’s work , his propensity to make a contribution to knowledge through his research .
The author feels compelled to point out that the work of the artist is not about the machine , but rather about art and the human mind .
At the time of the publishing , Margaret Boden was Professor of Philosophy and Psychology at the University of Sussex and had conducted research in the fields of psychology , computer science and artificial intelligence .
Her text for the catalogue of the Tate exhibition follows an introduction written by the artist and is preceded by a text by Michael G. Compton , curator of the exhibition .
The choice to invite Margaret A. Boden to contribute to the catalogue suggests that the curator felt important to have a critical text by a specialist in the field of cognitive sciences to better present and discuss the work of Harold Cohen .
Not all the authors that wrote on Harold Cohen , however , have seen the parallel to the computer research as a positive step .
The association of Cohen 's work to artificial intelligence research persisted beyond the nineties .
In her extensive publication on the work of Cohen , as already discussed , Pamela McCorduck described the link with artificial intelligence research .
Harold Cohen turned to computing machines to further develop his understanding of image-making .
He deemed it important to master the functioning of computers and of programming languages , and to pursue his research over the course of many decades .
He aimed at creating an autonomous entity that would eventually evolve and surprise its own maker by producing unexpected drawings , thus showing emerging properties and behaviours .
Critics and curators who commented on his work have equally stressed this affiliation and it is not a surprise that the most exhaustive essays written on the artists are not from art historians but rather from specialists in cognitive and computer science .
On the other hand , he often made clear how his goals and perspectives on machines differed to those held by computer scientists , as attested by several articles that he published .
In the same year , the artist was commissioned a sculpture for the Evoluon , Philip 's exhibition space in Eindhoven .
During the first years of his artistic career , he focused on sculpture , in particular experimenting with salvaged and recycled materials .
He describes that particular moment as follows : I can be very precise about when I discovered technology - it was when I discovered what servo systems were about .
From that moment , the artist was motivated by a very constant and coherent struggle to achieve a sculpture that would merge his research on motion , behaviour and intelligence .
At first , Edward Ihnatowicz was not directly concerned with issues such as artificial intelligence and emerging behaviour : his preoccupations were more sculptural than epistemological .
The idea behind the work was to realise a sculpture in which the formal choices resulted from functional imperatives , similar to the way that industrial components are shaped by utilitarian ends .
The sculpture had an anthropomorphic shape and resembled a head mounted on a long mechanical neck .
Unlike works from Alexander Calder and Jean Tinguely , where movements were determined by the wind or by motors , SAM’s movement actively responded to the environment .
Ihnatowicz explained that the idea behind SAM was not merely to stimulate interactivity , but rather to produce an abstract work of art whose aesthetic was determined by functionality instead of arbitrariness .
The work is the result of the artist’s fascination for industrial components , which he had previously used in his assemblages , as well as his admiration for the work of engineers who could provide a rational explanation for the formal choices of their products .
The artist’s aim was to produce a work of art , a sculpture whose aesthetic would be completely determined by operative principles .
According to the descriptions of some of the critics who visited the exhibition in London , the spectators were truly fascinated by the work and tended to interact with it for long periods of time .
These central questions motivated him to create his most ambitious and important work , Senster , to which SAM opened the path .
James Gardener , the centre’s exhibition designer , introduced Ihnatowicz to the executives of Philips .
work , it was also able to respond to movement .
The reason Ihnatowicz doubled the input source - responsive to both sound and movement was that he wanted to provoke a more complex and unpredictable reaction to the movement of the audience compared to his previous work .
The artist had intended to make the work available to scientists and researchers with the purpose of modifying the assembler code of the sculpture in order to test varied responses to the environment .
In this way , the work could be used as a device for testing and improving artificial intelligence programming , thus providing an elaborate tool for scientific research .
It is likely that Simons erroneously interpreted the artist’s claims about the possibility of reprogramming Senster in order to improve its responses to the audience and to generate a more lifelike behaviour .
However , Ihnatowicz does not assert that the computer can independently reformulates its own program in any of his articles .
The hypothesis that the computer was able to modify its own instructions should therefore be excluded .
However , the limited number of descriptions from the author in the comment row of the document and the absence of more detailed documents of higher-level algorithms for the factual regulation of the system prevent complete comprehension of the program .
The opportunity to work with computing machines seemed to Ihnatowicz the logical way to further investigate the question posed by his previous work .
To conceive the Senster , the artist felt that he needed to further deepen his technical knowledge , in particular in the field of computing : I felt it was time to learn more about digital processing .
Digital computing worried me because it seemed to require not only a much better knowledge of electronics than I possess , but also a knowledge of Boolean logic , Venn diagrams and the like .
If the computer and the assembler code were in part responsible for the peculiar movement of the Senster , this was the result of the care that the artist took to develop the articulations of its body .
The artist imitated the joints of a lobster to create the articulations .
He chose the lobster 's claws because they were easier to reproduce , compared to the ones belonging to other animals , which were more complex .
The starting point for the Senster was again the idea to produce a sculpture in which the aesthetic would be determined by functional needs .
But by creating this particular work , Ihnatowicz eventually learned that behaviour was what interested him the most .
The Evoluon , the Verburg-Holland Company had it installed on their own campus , as an outdoor sculpture to be appreciated for its aesthetic and historical values .
Unsatisfied with the results of his previous work , the artist focused on the possibility of an effective interaction between the public and the machine .
Ihnatowicz created the Bandit in collaboration with his PhD students at University College in London .
The new work mainly consisted of a hydraulically operated lever , powered with pressure sensors and connected to a computer .
It looked very similar to a slot machine , primarily because of the presence of the lever which was to be activated by the public .
The title recalled the alternative name given to slot machines : the one-armed bandits .
The public could interact with the work through the lever , moving it and applying pressure to it ; in return , the machine would apply pressure to the lever and register the response from the public .
Eventually , the computer would process the information concerning the response of the public from the interaction with the lever and would produce the results , through a printing machine .
Ihnatowicz determined that the Senster was not truly interactive and intelligent , but was only responding to some pre-programmed behaviour , yet the Senster showed the artist that the audience was fascinated by the behaviour of the work more so than its shape .
genuine interaction in which the machine would respond to the audience , thus paving the way for a more complex intelligent behaviour .
His desire was for computer scientists and robotics researchers to visit the Evoluon where they would experiment with the machine and in particular with the computer which directed the impressive sculpture .
He hoped that the Senster could eventually learn new , unexpected behaviours from its interactions with spectators and from the development of sophisticated programs .
In this sense , the work was intended by the artist to display generative qualities .
From these observations , the artist concluded that movement was what mostly intrigued the spectators .
Researcher Donald Michie and journalist Rory Johnston , in their promotional book on artificial intelligence and machines , also reported on Ihnatowicz’s experiment in which he tried to produce different behaviours : He also noticed a curious aspect of the effect the Senster had on people .
When he was testing it he gave it various random patterns of motion to go through .
The fact that Ihnatowicz was experimenting with random patterns is a sign of his intention to create unexpected behaviours .
The investigation of complex phenomena such as intelligence and understanding was the central objective of the artist 's research .
Ihnatowicz’s central idea is very clear : intelligence is not a phenomenon that can occur in an abstract environment , rather it needs a physical environment in order to emerge and evolve , an environment with which the artificial system needs to interact .
These concepts are often mentioned in the texts published by the artist during his life .
The following section will discuss these concepts in detail and their significance for Ihnatowicz’s work .
Through his work , Ihnatowicz developed a personal and peculiar approach , not only toward art but also toward specific topics related to technology and in particular artificial intelligence .
What were his primal concerns and what was his position with regard to the computing machine and the scientific research associated with it ?
The constant struggle to achieve what he would consider the ultimate sculpture and his perpetual dissatisfaction with his previous results show that the artist was not only ambitious but that he also had a clear vision of his goals .
Because the artist aimed at investigating the functioning of the human mind through the use of computers and robotics , it is comprehensible that his work has been mainly associated with the field of artificial intelligence .
Here is a vital and quite intangible problem of equal fascination to an artist and a scientist which , I suspect , will not be solved by either scientific methodology or artistic intuition alone .
This statement offers an interpretation of his position about the distinction between artistic and scientific research .
It seems that the artist believed in an approach that would combine scientific progress with artistic creativity .
According to his views , neither science nor art alone will achieve comprehensive knowledge of such a complex process .
Artistic creativity was , in his opinion , a necessary complement to the scientific methodology .
If an understanding of intelligence was his main objective , the artist soon discovered that it was through the study of the functioning of perception that some steps could be made in this regard .
Hence , perception was for Ihnatowicz the key to understanding intelligence and to eventually producing an artificially intelligent behaviour .
He also believed that perception could only take place in a moving body , a body that would need to interact and relate to a physical environment .
Hence , for Ihnatowicz perception and movement are not subordinate to each other but are rather interdependent .
From such hypothesis the artist deduced the prescriptions to concretely investigate intelligence through cybernetics : It seems likely that the most promising way of investigating the problems of intelligence would be by constructing an artificial organism and observing its performance in a real environment and in real time .
At a time when computer art started to emerge and the corresponding scientific field was dominated by the artificial intelligence research , Ihnatowicz developed a peculiar position by supplementing his artistic production with a very personal and original interpretation of some ongoing epistemological questions discussed within the cognitive sciences .
In keeping with his opinions , the artist focused on creating moving machines instead of complex computer programs .
The control of physical motion appeared to him to be the only possible way to approach the question of intelligence , and hence achieve the development of an emerging behaviour in an artificial machine .
Ihnatowicz never used expressions such as ‘emerging behaviours’ , ‘artificial life’ and ‘bottom-up’ : these concepts and terms would become widely employed only some decades later .
Nevertheless , artificial intelligence was very popular at the time when the artist created his cybernetic sculptures , and his work has subsequently been linked to it .
The artist himself refers to the artificial intelligence research in his own articles .
Brian Reffin Smith , during an interview with the artist , asked him directly about his opinions on artificial intelligence research .
Ihnatowicz confesses his scepticism towards that scientific field : Brian Reffin Smith : Is this where you tend to diverge from conventional artificial intelligence work ?
I am firmly convinced that thinking can never be demonstrated in a computer unless that computer is a controller for some physical device .
If thinking cannot be demonstrated in a computer lacking any physical output , the artist further suggested that thinking could not possibly occur in a system that does n't have a purpose in a physical environment .
This particular approach is today described as a top-down approach , because it imposes a pre-constructed model of intelligence on the machine and limits the reproduction of intelligence exclusively through programming , rather than allowing potential for interaction with the physical environment .
Ihnatowicz criticises this approach because he considers it as being inefficient , as the interview clearly points out .
The conditions for an intelligent behaviour to occur in an artificial system , according to Ihnatowicz , necessitate interaction with the environment through sensory and feedback tools and a motor device enabling the system to respond to inputs .
In other words , the artist believed that intelligence would not emerge from a finite and isolated program but rather through the physical interaction with the environment .
Perception , movement , and interaction in a physical environment : those are the problems that Ihnatowicz focused upon through his life and work .
He was convinced that artificial intelligence could not be possible unless these questions were successfully dealt with and solved in an artificial system .
This position strongly disagrees with the idea that artificial intelligence can be simulated and programmed in a machine by means 217
Their main idea was that a machine wouldn’t be able to evolve and thus truly develop intelligent behaviour unless it were given the time and the possibility to do so in a physical environment .
Humans learned and developed intelligence by living and interacting within their environment , and according to Brooks , the same process is necessary for machines and artificial systems if they are to evolve and display intelligent behaviour .
This hypothesis states that to build a system that is intelligent it is necessary to have its representations grounded in the physical world .
Accepting the physical grounding hypothesis as a basis for research entails building systems in a 218 bottom up manner .
Their approaches to explanatory models of intelligent behaviours are associated with embodied cognitive science .
Their position is now considered a turning point in the development of AI and robotics and it is indeed interesting to note the way in which Ihnatowicz’s ideas overlap with a stance that would later create a scission in scientific research .
In his writings , the artist affirms the importance of movement , perception and interaction as fundamental elements in the conception of an intelligent machine .
The similarities between Ihnatowicz and researchers like Brooks and Langton not only demonstrate that the artist was a forerunner in his approach regarding the question of intelligence and robotics , it also strengthens the supposition of his disagreement with traditional artificial intelligence research , as already expressed in his interview with Brian Reffin Smith .
However , his work was commonly associated with artificial intelligence by the majority of critics and historians .
In conclusion , Ihnatowicz was passionate about the idea of merging the arts and the sciences and encouraged artists to embrace new technologies .
He believed that this collaboration would ultimately lead to a better understanding of the human mind , more specifically , and of knowledge in general .
With the Senster , Edward Ihnatowicz created a spectacular work for an important venue , commissioned by a leading company in technology and did so relying on important financial and technological support .
How did critics and the public respond to this impressive work at the time of its presentation ?
The suggestive title of the article , ' Corporate Power ' implies that the loss of the work is to be attributed to the commissioning company and its ruthless decision to discard the work .
My analysis of the articles aims to provide a qualitative appreciation of the critic toward the work , as well as inferring the reaction of the general public from their description .
In particular , I was interested in understanding the critics’ perspective of the artist’s take on research associated with computing machines .
Most of the substantial articles written on Ihnatowicz during his lifetime are from curators and art critics involved in the crossover between the arts and technology .
Jasia Reichardt , who presented in her famous exhibition the artist’s first cybernetic sculpture , clearly expressed her interest for his work in her essays .
a computer and were convinced that their partner in dialogue on the teletypewriter was a human doctor sitting in another room."223 In Reichardt’s articles the conviction that art and technology should work together and share the same goal often surfaces .
The art critic Jonathan Benthall also praises the collaboration between the arts and technology as put forward by Jasia Reichardt .
According to Benthall , it is indeed this specific dialogue between arts and technology that delineates a criterion for the appreciation of Ihnatowicz’s work .
Much of his work was exploring concepts in artificial intelligence , particularly the link between perception and intelligence .
Zivanovic similarly considers the artist’s involvement with scientific research , linking his work to artificial intelligence and robotics , and suggesting that his ideas could significantly contribute to the improvement of these disciplines even today .
The examination of the articles and texts written on the artist permit several conclusions to be drawn .
Ihnatowicz was considered an influential artist during his lifetime , in particular by critics and curators interested in the use of computer and technology in art , and his work has often been associated with artificial intelligence research .
nevertheless interesting to consider that the artist was very well received during his lifetime by specialists working on the intersection of the arts and technologies .
In recent times , the artist has been described as a pioneer , though many critics and historians admit that today’s artistic community has largely forgotten him .
What is even more important to note , is that almost all the articles on the artist often ignore any aesthetic considerations or formal descriptions of his work and rather focus on its technological aspects .
While active as an artist , Edward Ihnatowicz was unanimously acclaimed as being a great engineer .
His work and his artistic contributions were appreciated mostly because of his expertise in approaching its goals , an approach that was described as bearing many similarities to a scientific one .
Rather than praising the aesthetic or conceptual qualities of his work , it is the artist’s technological achievements that were emphasised in the articles dedicated to him .
Financed by a private company , the exhibition at the Evoluon was a major one and an example of an exhibition with a focus on art and technology .
The question of the separation between new media art and contemporary art did not exist at that time .
However , this optimistic approach to new technologies was mostly fostered by critics , curators and companies such as Philips who were willing to finance artistic events .
From the artists’ perspective , the approach to scientific research in artificial
intelligence and to the computing machine has to be understood in terms of a very personal and visionary conception of the dialogue between the arts and the sciences , as is exemplified by Edward Ihnatowicz .
Harold Cohen and Edward Ihnatowicz developed a very personal use of computing machines in order to pursue their artistic explorations .
Both of them wrote articles in which they presented and discussed their visions and their research .
They developed a profound knowledge and expertise of the technologies without simply exploiting the machine as a tool for their artistic ends .
They both shared the desire to contribute , through their work , to a better understanding of the functioning of the human mind and the abilities associated with intelligence and creativity .
Finally , they aimed to create an artificial system - be it a cybernetic sculpture or a program running in a computer - that would display what would today be called an emerging behaviour .
However , Ihnatowicz and Cohen’s approaches and opinions do diverge at point .
Most of these differences result from the nature of the works and are important to our understanding of their specificities .
In the Bandit the possibilities of interaction are further explored : the work was able to respond to the actions of the spectator with a judgment in a printed form .
The artist expressed his belief that only through interactivity the work
According to Ihnatowicz , therefore , interactivity was the most important aspect of his artistic research as it was the key element for the production of emerging behaviour .
In Harold Cohen 's work , conversely , there is absolutely no interactivity between the work and the spectator .
The spectator has no influence over the work and the way it functions , nor on the drawings and paintings that the work generates .
The artist stated explicitly in numerous publications , that AARON is not a tool and there is no interaction between it and the spectator .
Once AARON has been programmed by its author and once it is started , it works on its own .
If the artist constantly reprograms his work to improve the quality but also the autonomy of the machine – which could be considered an interaction between the author and the work - this interaction takes place during the production of the work and it is not a quality of the work itself .
Edward Ihnatowicz had wished that the Senster would be constantly reprogrammed in order to display increasingly complex behaviour , a wish that remained unfulfilled .
This is exactly what Harold Cohen did with AARON throughout his life .
This radical position by Harold Cohen seems to have been abandoned in recent times : the artist decided to begin a new dialogue with AARON by painting by hand the printed drawings produced by the program , as in the first decades of its existence .
However , AARON continues to produce drawings independently without any interactive process .
The difference of interactivity involved in the works of Ihnatowicz and Cohen is representative of their visions for an efficient artificial system .
The works created by Ihnatowicz are interactive , cybernetic sculptures made predominantly of cast aluminium and steel parts which are powered by electrical wires and hydraulic systems .
As sculptures , they are unique pieces with finite dimensions and forms .
Although these qualities have unfortunately been often ignored by the majority of art critics who considered his
works , the artist admitted to having put a lot of care into designing the individual pieces that made up his sculptures .
The aesthetic qualities of the sculpted parts were likewise supposed to contribute to the works potential interactive capabilities .
Indeed , in Ihnatowicz’s sculptures interaction relied on movement , which in turn depended on the formal solution of the whole sculpture and each of its individual components .
In addition , the aesthetic qualities of the individual parts further contributed to the sculpture’s life-life behaviours , both in terms of its movement and its general shape .
The fact that the artist paid so much attention to the formal qualities of his works , is coherent with his artistic visions and goals in creating a seemingly living , moving sculpture .
The question of formal qualities is more difficult to consider in the work of Harold Cohen .
Although AARON is embodied in a physical object - the hardware - it is not a unique and finite work : it evolved over the course of a number of decades , and consequently changed its physical characteristics on several occasions .
However , the physical object is not necessarily determinant for the uniqueness of the work .
AARON could , indeed , be described in terms of its hardware and physical features and be appreciated for the aesthetic qualities of the design and shapes of the machinery that runs it .
But AARON is a computer program , independent of any physical support .
This task , however , would obviously provide little insight into Cohen’s artistic research and the significance of AARON as an artwork .
It is the purpose of the artist to investigate the activity of image-making by creating a program
It is therefore important that these drawings possess aesthetic qualities themselves , if they have to fulfil their status of drawings , instead of being simply contemplated as randomly generated marks on paper .
The question of the formal qualities , in Cohen’s work , is thus extremely complex and difficult to grasp .
The drawings produced by AARON are , after all , the result of AARON as a creative machine ; they allow the audience to appreciate AARON as a producer of artworks .
Consequently , to affirm that formal qualities are completely irrelevant in Cohen’s work would be a mistake , yet the artist deals with them in a completely different way compared to Ihnatowicz .
If Ihnatowicz worked on the aesthetic qualities of his sculptures while creating them , in order to imitate a living behaviour , Cohen contemplated the nature of aesthetic qualities while programming his work to create an autonomous drawing machine .
Both artists have employed computer technology and have consequently developed a programming language for their artistic purpose .
They have been commonly associated with research in artificial intelligence because of their use of computers and their attempt to imitate some aspects of human intelligence with them .
What is the relevance and the complexity of the code source involved in their works ?
The program developed was mainly applied to regulate the hydraulic pistons and the sensors in order to provide the work with an interactive movement .
The artist admitted that the computer program was quite simple and he wished that other computer engineers could have experimented with it in order to improve on the original version .
Aleksandar Zivanovic describes the program with the following words : Senster 's program was written by Ihnatowicz himself .
Although Aleksander Zivanovic admits that the Senster 's code was ' sophisticated ' , it was nevertheless a functional code that simply directed the movements of the sculpture to be attracted or repulsed by sounds and movements .
In fact , Ihnatowicz never really developed or aimed at developing a very complex computer program , because he didn’t believe that an intelligent system could be accomplished through programming and symbolic representation alone .
AARON is the code that its author is constantly rewriting and updating .
The artist learned how to write and program in several languages before turning to Lisp , which he found efficient enough for his purpose and has used it ever since .
Although the source code is not publicly accessible , the artist has described its functioning , the technical problems he faced and how he managed to solve them in detail .
Before using a large inkjet printer , Harold Cohen also built some plotter and turtle devices for the production of the paintings , yet the objectives that the artist was aiming at were not solved in the hardware alone but rather in the code itself .
Both artists intended to create artificial systems that would display emerging properties , although this specific expression is not used in their publications .
In Ihnatowicz’s case , these properties would be displayed in a sculpture supposedly capable of acting and reacting in a life-like manner while altering its behaviour based on its interaction with the audience .
surprise the audience for their affinity with organic , animal behaviour .
In Cohen’s case , these properties would surface with the creation of a computer program capable of modifying itself and creating drawings that would surprise even its own author .
‘What is the minimum condition under which a set of marks functions as an image?’ On the simplest level it was not hard to propose a plausible answer : it required the spectator 's belief that the marks had resulted from a purposeful human , or human-like , act .
He programmed AARON in order to enquire about those minimum conditions .
In the artist’s opinion , the work would challenge our notions of intelligence and creativity because it would be capable of autonomously producing objects that are usually considered the result of an intentional human-like cognitive act .
Emerging properties such as the possibility of displaying ‘cognitive capabilities’ , in Harold Cohen’s view , arise in the program’s faculty to autonomously deal with forms and colours and to create unpredictable results .
Unpredictable to such extent that it would be impossible for the audience to assert whether or not the drawings created by the program are the result of a purposeful , cognitive act .
They both believed that a deep understanding and mastering of the technologies employed was essential to obtain the artistic quality they aimed at , as well as a means of deepening their approach .
The majority of critics and historians have appreciated this aspect of their works by celebrating their innovative role in the use of technologies associated with computing machines and their applications .
On the other hand , Ihnatowicz and Cohen truly developed a very personal exploration of the technologies that they employed , independent from the philosophy and the approach advocated by the scientific research to which they were constantly linked .
Above all , the cybernetic sculpture and the drawing program that they created were the result of their personal artistic preoccupations , for the most part addressing questions about how to imitate life through a moving sculpture and how to understand the ‘semantics of painting’ .
They nevertheless exploited it to explore their own visions and obsessions as artists .
During the seventies , artists like Harold Cohen and Edward Ihnatowicz developed works that exploited the possibilities offered by computers to explore questions pertaining to creativity , perception and intelligence .
However , not all researchers and critical theorists were unanimous in their praise of the benefits of the implementation of computing machines within society .
Some critics began to question the validity of scientific research associated with computers and digital technologies , as well as the impact of the information revolution on society .
What were the positions of those who opposed computers and artificial intelligence , and how influential were their views ?
Which arguments were put forward when questioning the dangers associated with these discoveries ?
Furthermore , how has computer-generated art developed since the pioneering years of this kind of production ?
Can we identify a parallel between the arguments advanced against artificial intelligence research and the positions of some media artists ?
In the following sections , I will investigate some important criticisms of artificial intelligence and computing machines , in order to understand the theoretical framework surrounding the oppositional tendencies that have emerged in the current new media art field .
I am interested in mapping the perception of the impact of computing machines within society , as well as the reception of artificial intelligence research .
Firstly , I will consider the seminal texts written by researchers , critical theorists and philosophers .
Then , I will analyse the positions of artists that used computing machines during the eighties and nineties in order to understand the evolution of this artistic practice and to question whether a parallel of the critical discourse against artificial intelligence and computing machines can be found within their discourse , in particular by artists using
This analysis will provide insight into some of the ongoing discussions within the current field of new media art , while also highlighting any shift in perception regarding the place of digital and media technologies within this artistic field .
In order to appreciate the complexity of the evolution of an artistic production , the analysis is less effective if limited to a set group of artists .
For this reason , I have preferred to develop my research horizontally and in multiple directions .
I have researched and analysed a large number of publications , catalogues and essays written on this topic , retaining the recurring names and positions .
In addition , a number of dialogues and discussions with a variety of personalities currently working in the media art field have also supplemented my research .
Voices of opposition , questioning the validity and morality of artificial intelligence and the dangers of a wider implementation of computing machines within our society , can be found within the discipline itself .
The authors expressed their concerns not only regarding artificial intelligence research , but also for example , in relation to the growing use of computing machines as a pedagogical tool in schools .
Current AI is based on the idea , prominent in philosophy since Descartes , that all understanding consists in forming and using appropriate representations .
Thus formulated , the problem has so far resisted solutions .
They relied on the constitution of a large knowledge base .
By discussing cases in which human understanding relies on common sense knowledge , such as natural-language understanding and learning , the authors argued that artificial intelligence will eventually fail in these domains and will therefore be unable to reproduce cognitive human-like behaviours .
considerations concerning the future use of computers in education and in management .
They warned against the growing propensity to rely on machines instead of human beings in environments necessitating decision-making .
At the end of the seventies , computer engineer Joseph Weizenbaum strongly criticised not only the validity of artificial intelligence research but also its ethical values .
They have contributed little either to cognitive psychology or to practical problem solving."247 The author deliberately used the term ‘intelligentsia’ to imply that the people working within this field created a closed group of researchers promoting their positions and protecting their own field .
In his opinion , they failed to achieve their goals and to fulfil the promises made to secure the funding of their work and to win popularity among a wider public .
Not only have policy makers abdicated their decision-making responsibility to a technology they do not understand - though all the while maintaining the illusion that they , the policy makers , are formulating policy 248 questions and answering them - but responsibility has altogether evaporated .
If Wiener sensed the dangers of an automated society but remained optimistic about our aptitude to control and turn the process of automation in our favour , Weizenbaum affirmed that the implementation of computing machines within society was already producing negative outcomes .
The critical positions in opposition of artificial intelligence based on epistemological or ethical considerations , as put forward by Dreyfus and Weizenbaum , were not the only attacks .
Another criticism came from the field of robotics and the new-born field of artificial life .
research , rather than its purpose or its ethical implications .
Traditional AI tried to generate a specific behaviour in an artificial system by reproducing it in a top-down fashion from a natural system .
The following passages , the first by Rodney Brooks and the second by Christopher Langton , summarise their ideas : Nouvelle AI relies on the emergence of more global behaviour from the interaction of smaller behavioural units .
As with heuristics there is no a priori guarantee that this will always work .
Natural life emerges out of the organized interaction of a great number of non living molecules , with no global controller responsible for the behaviour of every part .
Rather , every part is a behaviour itself , and life is the behaviour that emerges from all of the local interactions among individual behaviours .
These concepts and approaches greatly diverge from research based on symbolic representation and consequently put artificial intelligence in question .
Instead of focusing on the reproduction of properties within a system , they focus on the concept of emergence itself , attempting to initiate it from the bottom up .
This paradigm shift in approach certainly contributed to the success of these new disciplines .
Embodied robotics and artificial life , in which the concept of emergence played a central role , offered not only an alternative to artificial intelligence but also a way to overcome previous criticisms of the field and its unaccomplished promises .
focused on the process of the system and its potential to generate a higher order of complexity autonomously .
In a way , the process of emergence itself became the goal of the research .
The question of the dangers of modern technologies in post-industrial society has been an ongoing debate within the humanities .
According to Heidegger , as new technologies are developed , society becomes less aware of the very nature of these technologies .
Heidegger uses the example of the hydroelectric power plant which supplanted the ancient windmill to illustrate his concept .
The German philosopher doesn’t seem to consider new technologies as being negative per se , but assigns the responsibility of understanding their nature and their functioning to the people , thus suggesting a normative approach to the question of technology .
Marcuse attributes the homogenization of the post-industrial society to the emergence of new technologies .
Although Marcuse does not specifically question the validity of artificial intelligence or computing machines , his critique encompasses post-industrial society as a whole , together with its machines and products of commodity .
Marcuse holds positivist , rational philosophy as the predominant ideology of post-industrial society and considers it dangerous to the evolution of mankind .
He sees the refusal of technology as the only way to escape such a normalised , sterile and oppressive society , suggesting therefore an attitude of rejection and opposition .
In their analysis of contemporary colonialism , propagated by what they refer to as ' the Empire ' , the authors reaffirm the role of computing machines as an instrument of control .
Hardt and Negri assert that the corporations running and developing the communication technologies , producing new hardware and software , have an increasing control on the society and territories in which the technologies are implemented .
In their view , resistance should also be enacted on a global level .
For others the broadening of the debate to include questions of democracy and cultural production , presents an alternative solution to the implementation and regulation of modern technologies in society .
Thus , my intention is to say : No more illusions about technology .
The authors elaborate on the danger of a technological world over which individuals have little access , knowledge or control .
We ca n't stop everything to give ourselves time for reflection .
I believe it 's within the inquiry into technology that we 'll find , not a solution , but the possibility of a 259 solution .
However , he also suggests that artists can play a role in the evolution of
society by participating , through their works , in the debate around technological progress .
They argue that society should return to traditional moral values and not delegate important choices concerning its evolution to a restricted circle of scientists and specialists .
In Our Posthuman Future,263 for example , Francis Fukuyama warns us against an uncontrolled development of scientific and technological progress and advocates for federal regulation of scientific research .
Fukuyama’s comments mainly refer to recent fields of research such as bioengineering and evaluating the dangers of eugenics , but his arguments and admonitions concern artificial intelligence , as well .
Kurzweil’s detailed prediction of society provides an admirable example of a confident faith in the success of artificial intelligence research .
This particular moment , the singularity , is described as the fundamental turning point in the evolution of humanity .
Kurzweil carefully support his thesis with mathematical arguments , mostly relying on the wellknown Moore’s law , which describes the exponential evolution of power computation in the production of computer processors .
According to Kurzweil , Moore’s law supports the evidence that our technology will eventually lead to the creation of a machine with the computational capacities of the human brain .
If Kurzweil’s visionary predictions inevitably gathered supporters , he nonetheless encountered some opponents with whom he openly compared his theories .
Despite Kurzweil 's passionate advocacy for artificial intelligence , his visionary predictions and somehow questionable arguments might have in part contributed to discrediting artificial intelligence research , at least to a portion of the audience .
for his contributions in the fields of communication and society .
In Barbrook’s view , by creating expectations that would never be fulfilled , the researchers were allowed to constantly preserve their financial support .
He further asserted that the real purpose of artificial intelligence was the production of sophisticated technologies for the army and that the epistemological goals expressed by the researchers were merely a way to justify their activities to the public and cover their militaristic objectives .
In his view , these companies were responsible for promoting the myth that intelligent machines will eventually free workers from hard labour .
According to Barbrook , computers and machines only served the interests of the patrons , increasing profits while producing even more unemployment .
Undeniably , the question concerning advancements in technology and the way in which it conditions society has generated lively debate .
Despite the initial enthusiasm for artificial intelligence and computing machines , as the debate evolved these new technologies faced a number of attacks and an increasingly bad reputation .
The negative critique of artificial intelligence and computing machines came both from researchers involved in the field as well as from a variety of philosophers and critical theorists .
The epistemological arguments against artificial intelligence view the discipline’s research goals , including the creation of autonomous intelligence and consciousness , as unachievable .
Furthermore , the arguments question the value of this research and whether it makes any real contribute to knowledge at all .
Similar arguments have been discussed by researcher Joseph Weizenbaum and philosopher Hubert Dreyfus .
Another group of epistemological arguments questioned the approach to traditional artificial intelligence research , accusing it not only of improper goals , but also of using improper approaches to achieve them .
These arguments have been advanced by researchers in the field of robotics and artificial life , respectively by Rodney Brooks and Christopher Langton , for instance .
On the other hand , ethical arguments against artificial intelligence and computing machines are usually inscribed in a general critic of post-industrial society and communication technologies .
Additionally , Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri , point out how information
technologies serve the interests of private corporations acting on a global scale and thus contributing to the disparities between developed and underdeveloped countries .
In addition , it should be mentioned that some philosophers such as Paul Virilio , Sylvère Lotringer and Andrew Feenberg advocate for a creative use of technologies in order to prevent the monopoly of knowledge by the ruling class .
A second group of ethical arguments , focusing more specifically on artificial intelligence , points out its complicity with the defence industry .
These voices are exemplary of a variety of critical stances towards scientific research .
They are not delimited to a geographic area or a specific time span , but they are the answer to the development of the implementation of computing machines in our society .
The next section will attempt to establish if these critiques are limited to scientific research and the humanities or if similar arguments have been developed within the artistic field as well .
It has not been an unusual practice to complement festivals dedicated to new media art with panels and debates on philosophical and sociological questions about the impact of new technologies on life and society , to which prominent researchers from the humanities and sciences contribute .
In particular , the debate concerning artificial intelligence has received significant attention from artists that were producing works of generative art. The Ars Electronica festival and the Leonardo journal have provided fertile ground for the ongoing debate .
What were the positions of prominent artists using computing machines on these topics after the seventies ?
The current state of development in computer technology represents the pinnacle of technological and scientific research and development , which has accompanied a history of thousands of years of human evolution .
It should thus surprise no one if our current perception of the human mind is that of a parallel270 processing network computer .
Considering the human mind as the equivalent of a computer - or a network of computers - is the key assumption of traditional artificial intelligence research .
Expressed at the end of the nineties , Weibel’s statement exemplifies the faith in computing machines and artificial intelligence within the section of artistic community that seeks to promote stronger relations between the arts and the sciences .
The enthusiasm for new technologies and the possibilities it affords to both society and artistic production strongly characterised the work and ideas of another pioneering artist in this field : Roy Acott .
The artist envisaged a telematic revolution and the advent of a new society based on connectivity .
The very term ' information technology ' sounds cold and rather alienating , like the outer offices of some Kafkaesque institution .
Such a vision was already exemplified in his work La Plissure du Texte , an obvious reference to the Roland Barthes’s book , Le Plaisir du Texte .
The exhibition’s central theme was based on a survey of the use of electricity in art. Roy Ascott exploited the ARTEX network272 to create a work that would involve and connect not only several other participants , mostly artists and student , but also different cities through a world-wide network .
The work consisted of a collaborative text , revolving around the idea of a fairy-tale using a similar approach to the surrealist method of the cadavre excquis .
Aspects of Gaia tackled questions related to the earth as a whole and as a living organism , suggesting references to the ideas of British chemist James Lovelock and his theory of Gaia .
On the upper level of the building , a large horizontal screen displayed images and texts coming from the world .
The images could then be manipulated by acoustic sensors or with a computer mouse .
The second part of the work was installed outside the building : the public was able to join a ride on a trolley installed with LED screens that would display the collected data about Gaia , the earth .
These collaborative works by Roy Ascott depict his positivistic vision of a society that is moved forward by technology .
Although the ideas of Roy Ascott are somehow more visionary , abstract and poetic then the reflections of pioneers such as Cohen and Ihnatowicz , they display a similar and genuine interest in using the computing machine to contribute to the enlightenment of society .
The American artist is probably best known for his comprehensive study of artists involved in scientific research and new technologies.275 Wilson obtained his MFA in generative systems and performance art at the Art Institute of Chicago and teaches Information Art at San Francisco State University .
Wilson developed his works in a manner consistent with the contemporary art world , by creating complex and interactive installations designed to be specifically experienced in exhibition spaces .
His work is characterised by artificial intelligence research and the application of computing machines .
Each dummy had its own story to tell and started to speak as soon as a spectator approached it .
The technology allowed for a short discussion between the computer and the spectator , but the main focus of the artist was on the discussed topics relating to everyday life , and the reaction of the spectators to the machine .
In this way , Wilson’s works attempted to mirror some goals in artificial intelligence , in particular the possibility of a dialogue and even an exchange of emotions between real people and artificial agents .
Furthermore , he expresses the belief that artificial intelligence research should indeed pursue ambitious epistemological goals , to which artists should explicitly be invited to contribute .
At its core , artificial intelligence research is about much more fundamental issues than construction of the next year 's model of expert system .
On the other hand , it criticises the research for its lack of more ambitious goals aimed at the betterment of society and suggests that the formulation of such goals can be done with the collaboration of other disciplines , not the least the arts .
This position is very similar to that of Paul Virilio , Sylvère Lotringer and Andrew Feenberg , as previously discussed .
Another notable artist that has integrated the use of computers and the investigation into artificial intelligence applications in art is the American artist David Rokeby .
The work consists of an interactive device translating the human body movement into an environment of sounds .
The Giver of Names consists of a computer program that , coupled with a camera and a video projector , is capable of recognising random objects submitted to its attention by a spectator .
Additionally , it can perform some speculation about the objects and their functions .
Central to Rokeby’s reflections is the distinction between reality and virtual reality .
The reason why Rokeby engaged particularly with new interfaces permitted by computers and modern technologies , is precisely because of the interactive possibilities that they allow .
The artist concludes his essay by affirming that interactivity implies responsibility , and that new technologies should be approaches with caution .
The possibilities opened by the use of computers and the simulation of an intelligent artificial agent inspired many artists to create works in which interactivity played an important role .
As in the works created by Stephen Wilson and David Rokeby , these approaches aimed to produce either a realistic dialogue or a creative interaction with the spectators .
What are the relationships between the technical aspects of thought , and what we think of as 278 personality ?
In a similar way as Stephen Wilson , Kenneth Feingold regards artificial intelligence research as an inquiry into greater ontological and epistemological questions , rather than a technology at the service of industry or the military .
This is the reason why he decided to engage with this field as an artist .
For this purpose , Feingold admits to having studied the literature around traditional artificial intelligence and having learned to program .
He later realized , nonetheless , that the spectators were only interested in testing the effectiveness of the work’s intelligence and that they completely ignored the artistic qualities and conceptual intentions behind the works .
With a somehow similar purpose , Japanese artist Naoko Tosa approached artificial intelligence and incorporated computers into her artistic productions to explore emotions and philosophical questions , instead of attempting to imitate scientific research .
Naoko Tosa has created works exploiting artificial intelligence techniques precisely with the purpose of covering the areas that are usually omitted by scientific research , areas such as emotion , poetry and beauty .
The Japanese artist concedes that new technologies and machines sometimes scare public opinion by generating fears about the dehumanisation of society .
But artificial intelligence was not the only scientific field that seduced artists using computers .
During the nineties , after the emergence of artificial life and embodied robotics , artists started to produce works drawing on these recent fields .
The artist later developed the work into a larger installation , Autopoiesis , composed of a larger number of arms .
to develop true relationships with the computer."281 Although Kenneth Rinaldo adopted recent artificial life and embodied robotics theories in his artistic production , he did not altogether discard traditional artificial intelligence research .
As indicated by these sentences , the artist did not discard the traditional ideas and approach of artificial intelligence research .
In his opinion , both approaches are complimentary in the development of emerging behaviours .
Simon Penny , for example , has taken a very critical stance against artificial intelligence and its related top-down approach .
The works of the Australian artist , share many similarities with the robotic experiments carried on by Rodney Brook , for example .
Penny considers research in artificial intelligence as simply wrong and based upon erroneous assumptions , as the result of an enduring philosophical fallacy regarding the mind-body problem .
It is through examples such as these that we can see just how clearly so called ` objective science ' can be heavily value laden , perpetuating dualistic and colonialising ideologies .
The most profound , as I see it , is that it offers an alternative to the current all too deterministic paradigm of interactivity as pre-set responses to user navigation through an ossified database .
Emergent interactive behaviour would not be derived from a set of pre-determined alternatives .
In these paragraphs , the artist reformulates the paradigm of embodied robotics and the importance of the concept of emergence .
This criticism appears contradictory at first , since the artificial intelligence research is obviously based on materialistic assumptions , which automatically exclude the hypothesis that intelligence is the result of a spiritual substance .
substances , the latter being responsible for mind and emotional related activities .
How can Penny affirm that artificial intelligence research falls into what he considers the dualist mistake ?
Penny believes that intelligent behaviours , in order to arise , need a holistic approach as prefigured from the bottom-up paradigm .
In my opinion , the approaches and definition suggested by Maturana and Varela are much more pertinent than that of Tom Ray .
In his opinion , intelligence is situational and grounded in the biological reality of the intelligent organism and the environment in which it evolves and to which it relates .
So far , we have only managed to create machines that imitate some very specific aspects of what we consider intelligent actions ; because these machines are not independent and self-sufficient , in Penny’s opinion they cannot be considered truly intelligent .
During the same interview , he stressed the importance of the opportunity for artists to experiment with technologies and ultimately express their poetical visions , rather than attempting to recreate life in artificial systems .
After the establishment of artificial life and bottom-up approaches , other artists , critics and theorists involved in computer generated art started to embrace the arguments against artificial intelligence .
With the same verve , artist and biologist Thomas Ray supported the idea that human intelligence cannot be reproduced artificially , but that digital intelligence might evolve in a way unpredicted by humans .
We can not expect digital organisms evolving in this way to perform useful work for us , such as guiding robots or interpreting human languages .
Artists Louis-Philippe Demers and Bill Vorn created spectacular and somehow uncanny installations with performing robots .
They have been very active in promoting this approach within artistic research , through their work and their academic activities .
Christa Sommerer and Laurent Mignonneau’s works present aesthetic qualities and are consciously conceived for artistic venues and exhibition spaces ; the artists take great care in the formal qualities of their interactive installations .
Many of their works consists of an artificial universe or ecosystem that is graphically represented through a screen , sometimes powered with a tactile device allowing the spectator to interact with the life-like digital creatures evolving in the universe created by the artists .
They described their artistic research as investigating the implications of technology for society .
The possibility of interaction between the public and the artificial creatures is justified by the intention to further develop a sense of responsibility in the public toward a new form of life .
the development of artificial life forms , but rather to raise and discuss philosophical questions involving the responsibility of the spectator toward artificial living organisms .
The artist thus takes on a new role , no longer creating autonomous and elevated artworks but radically giving up control over the art itself .
The public is 291 responsible for what it sees and the worlds it creates .
Sommerer and Mignonneau are very careful not to defend bold statements about the advances in scientific research ; they rather concede that their intention is to generate debate through their work .
Their position manifests an awareness of the critical reception of computing technologies within the artistic field .
They said that computers are just the extension of the military industry .
During the interview , Christa Sommerer additionally states that they were neither interested in the bottom-up versus top-down debate , nor in the serious possibility of generating a truly living artificial being .
Artificial life algorithms , coupled with the possibility of interactive media interface and an artistic approach were a means for the artists to eventually stimulate a debate about life and responsibilities .
This is the reason why , in some of their works , the audience is called to participate in the creation and survival of artificial life forms .
The concerns expressed by Sommerer and Mignonneau regarding the impact of modern technologies on society reflect a growing tendency in artistic production associated with media art , and a likely explanation as to the preference for artificial life over artificial intelligence .
developing area of artificial life has been full of promise."293 The argument proposed by the media art historian seems to suggest that the reasons behind the failure of artificial intelligence are to be found in the methodology of the research , which unable to achieve its own goals is losing credibility as a result .
Consequently , artificial life appears more interesting both for researchers and artists .
In this respect , Mitchell Whitelaw has analysed the artistic production associated with artificial life and published an extensive book describing a variety of approaches .
He is among the researchers in the media art field who clearly takes a critical position regarding traditional artificial intelligence research .
If Whitelaw appears to criticise artificial intelligence and embrace artificial life , thus supporting the epistemological argument proposed by the researchers within the later field , other art historians have rather considered artificial intelligence research from an ethical perspective .
artists started to manifest dissent concerning the relationship between art and technology .
But the association of technology with the defence industry is only a part of the discourse developed by new media artists and critics in regard to the impact of technologies .
When it comes to the growing presence of computers in everyday life , some artists have raised issues in relation to the emerging digital culture .
Mary Flanagan , an artist who has frequently dealt with artificial reality , published several articles addressing the subject in a critical way .
In her essays , she advocates for more awareness and open discussion around virtual reality and virtually constructed agents .
She urges for the adoption of a moral and critical position towards computing machines and digital technologies in order to question the implications of artificial reality and artificial agents on the lives of individuals and society as a whole .
Katherine Hayles , alongside Donna Haraway and her famous Cyborg Manifest,298 belongs to a group of critical theorists that have considered the emergence of a post296
While Hayles and Haraway not only examine the dangers of cybernetic research and the development of a post-human society but also the positive outcomes , other critical theorists do n't share the same optimism .
Thinkers like Moravec , More , and others hope to combine human minds with technical artefacts to eliminate the fragility and mortality of the human body."299 Becker concludes that these visions of the humanity have a negative impact on society because they tend to strengthen selfish and reclusive behaviours .
Their arguments warn against the alienating dangers intrinsically to the implementation of computing machines within our society , as well as its association with capitalism and technological warfare .
However , other art critics point out that the association of modern technology with military funding and capitalism should not be carried over to artistic production .
It is only outsiders who can accuse the electronic arts of compliance with the ' capitalist system ' .
The sad reality is that artists are n't all that different from ordinary computer users , unless they are part of the celebrity high-end circuit .
For the majority of artists access to technology is limited to consumer electronics .
Often there is no money for more state of the art machines and software .
Industries already have their own networks who do the demo design .
What is interesting to note in this paragraph , is that Lovink recognises how among uninformed critics , the association of artistic production involved with new technologies and computers to the ' capitalist system ' has become a fact .
In Lovink 's opinion , artists that use new media in their work are unjustly criticised by curators and critics who are not involved in this specific artistic production .
According to him , it is only a handful of artists that can benefit from collaboration and significant support from the industries producing these medias .
According to the critical theorist , the choice to work with a specific medium and the content of the work produced by the majority of media artists cannot therefore be dictated by commercial imperatives .
The association between the research in artificial intelligence , private corporations and the defence industry has been recognised and discussed by Andrew Pickering in a recent essay on cybernetics , in which he is a respected authority .
In his comprehensive history of cybernetics , he admits that the research has involved and subsequently been compromised by military funding .
The author suggests that the association of cybernetic research with the defence industry should not be exaggerated .
By way of contrast , he provides several examples of cybernetic research that has developed independently and on many occasions even in amateurish fashion .
and capitalism , are evidence that today this association is deeply implemented in collective representations of these fields of research .
The arguments brought against modern technologies and more specifically artificial intelligence can be distinguished between epistemological arguments questioning the scientific goals and their approaches , and ethical arguments addressing the consequences and the impact of the research on the society .
Parallel to the voices raised within the scientific community and the humanities , artists involved in media art have been discussing the same questions in critical terms .
The debate about the use of computing machines in art was favoured by publications and institutions dedicated to arts and technologies .
International events and journals focusing on media art such as the Ars Electronica Festival and the Leonardo journal functioned as important platforms for the discussion and confrontation of ideas between artists , critics and researchers .
If we consider the Leonardo journal as a barometer with which to gauge artistic production in the field of new media art , these numbers suggest a shift in interest from artificial intelligence to artificial life during the nineties .
Another relevant indicator , the Ars Electronica Festival is an internationally recognized event dedicated to art and technology .
Every year it hosts a series of exhibitions , conferences and awards .
It is interesting to consider the presence of researchers and their participation in the symposiums organized within the Festival .
Over the years , the most famous researchers associated with artificial intelligence , robotics and artificial life have been invited to participate in conferences and podium discussions .
The articles on artificial intelligence and artificial life in Leonardo and the participation of researchers at the Ars Electronica festival suggest that the scientific debate opposing artificial intelligence and artificial art has fuelled the artistic activity and has significantly shaped the evolution of artistic production within computer and generative art. Having considered the positions of the artists that discussed the opposition between bottom-up and top-down approaches , it seems that the majority of artists involved in computer-based generative art after the eighties were all very favourable to embracing the new bottom-up approach , while I hardly found any artist willing to advocate for the top-down approach .
Why did the bottom-up approach , put forward by embodied robotic and artificial life , have greater success and impact on the artistic production ?
artists and the evolution of the topics in the Ars Electronica festival and the Leonardo journal .
The ideas and works of the new scientific fields were possibly more inspiring and convincing for a new generation of artists .
Furthermore , the artists were eager to participate in a new genre that manifestly aroused interest in the media art field .
The necessity to present newer work related to the most ‘trendy’ disciplines is quite understandably an imperative in a field that seeks to connect art and technology .
Another reason could be linked to the exaggeratedly optimistic and confident attitude of some researchers and institutions in the artificial intelligence field itself , where the announcement of upcoming innovations and spectacular achievements - that would never be fulfilled - was a regular feature .
These promises may have undermined the credibility of artificial intelligence in the eyes of artists .
Conversely , artificial life research and embodied robotics did not engage in audacious predictions , precisely because it was founded in an approach that would expect the properties to emerge from the system itself .
The researchers in these new fields , therefore , were not necessarily obliged to predict exactly which property they were expecting and in which timeframe : rather they focused on the concept of emergence and on the evolutionary possibilities offered by the system .
In my opinion , it is for this reason that the concept of emergence had such a significant impact on artistic production , a concept that allowed for much more freedom and outcomes in a creative context .
On the other hand , epistemological concerns and the fascination for new fields of research were probably not the only reasons that artists were encouraged to dissociate themselves with artificial intelligence research .
Questions of aesthetic , formal qualities and the reception of the works were also involved .
He also correctly predicted the necessity and the emergence of an aesthetic discourse associated with this field .
Indeed , questions regarding the formal qualities of the works and their reception were also debated between the artists , curators and critics involved with computer technologies .
Computational linguistics Professor and composer Remko Scha , for example , regarded the works of art produced with new media and computer programming as being the successors of Dadaist traditions .
He affirms that computer-based art further develops dada-like strategies exploiting automatic creation , in order to represent the diversity and unpredictability of nature and reality , following the Kantian idea that nature is superior to artifice .
But not all the critics and historians appreciated the works created with computers .
Brian Reffin Smith has been deeply involved with computer art and often defended this kind of artistic production , affirming its artistic validity .
Nonetheless , the author concedes that many works produced in this field are mediocre and aesthetically uninteresting .
In affirming the dull and un-innovative character of the majority of artworks created with computers , de facto he invites artists engaged in this production to show more creativity and audacity .
The considerations put forward by Brian Reffin Smith are representative of a larger critical reception of works associated with new technologies .
Artists have always been sensible concerning the reception of their works .
Another important factor certainly played a role in facilitating the shift from top-down to bottom-up strategies : the association of artificial intelligence with capitalism and the defence industry put forward by many philosophers and researchers .
In this respect , Geert Lovink makes an important point , when he advocates for media art and affirms that it is mainly misunderstood and wrongly associated with capitalism .
The statement is interesting because , while rejecting the association of media art with the corporate world , it also stresses how this association persists in the cultural field .
Under such conditions , it might be understandable that artists working with computers and generative approaches felt compelled to justify their work as being artistic , thus dissociating it from artificial intelligence research that was inevitably linked to the defence industry and to capitalism .
The attacks by critical theorists and researchers against artificial intelligence contributed to the undermining of the theoretical background associated with the top-down paradigm , thereby encouraging the shift of interest towards artificial life and bottom-up strategies .
From the analysis of the positions of the artists working with computer and generative approaches , we can conclude that attacks on artificial intelligence have had an impact on their artistic practices .
Artificial intelligence has been accused of being founded on an erroneous basis and of being incapable of achieving its epistemological goals .
As a consequence , many artists praised the merits of artificial life research in opposition to artificial intelligence .
More particularly , some artists raised ethical questions regarding the massive implementation of computer technologies , artificial intelligence and artificial reality .
They argued that it should be the role of artists to question the moral consequences of the implementation of such technologies in our society .
Finally , some artists and critics expressed dissatisfaction concerning the formal qualities of the works and their reception , in particular those works involving computer technologies .
It is probably not a coincidence that , while artificial life research surfaced as an alternative to the traditional artificial intelligence research in the eighties , many artists working in the fields of computer and generative art were keen to embrace the newest trend .
It is also relevant to note that they not only embraced the new approach but they also actively engaged in the theoretical discussion , further polarising the opposition between the traditional top-down and the new bottom-up paradigm .
The question concerning the implementation of modern technologies within our society has raised a significant debate among philosophers , researchers and artists .
Ethical and epistemological arguments against artificial intelligence research have been discussed not only within the scientific field , but also in the arts .
In conclusion , we can affirm that the artistic production in this field has been particularly shaped by the debate opposing the traditional top-down approach and subsequently embracing the bottom-up approach .
If in the pioneering years computers were considered as an opportunity for epistemological research , in the following years some artists began to move in an opposite direction , possibly preluding more overtly oppositional tendencies .
The implementation of the computing machine in society was not without controversy , as discussed in the previous chapter .
Nevertheless , its use in the artistic field seemed to progress and raise interest within a larger artistic community , as indicated by the development of festivals and journals dedicated to digital and media art such as Ars Electronica and Leonardo .
What about the traditional field of art and its circuit ?
Expectations were high regarding the last documenta of the millennium , directed by the French historian and curator Catherine David .
Swiss curator Simon Lamunière was commissioned to design and curate the website , in collaboration with Catherine David , as well as the showroom dedicated to these works in the documenta-Halle during the exhibition .
Joan Heemskerk and Dirk Paesmans , also known as Jodi , were among the artists invited to participate in the website and exhibition .
cluster of artists , critics and curators providing a specific theoretical framework and a vocabulary for it .
It was a chance for artists working with computers to present their work in an internationally significant venue such as documenta , and therefore an opportunity to gain visibility and recognition among the more traditional and prestigious contemporary art world .
For this reason , expectations were high not only for the public but particularly for the emerging media art scene .
The event went through some turbulence and the presentation of works of media art at documenta was not performed without difficulties and conflicts .
Which choices were made in the selection of the artists and in the presentation of their works ?
To what extend were they integrated in the main exhibition and in the general concept of the event ?
What were the reactions of the professional press to these works and their presentation ?
Conclusively , what has been the significance of this event concerning the career of the artists ?
I have approached these questions by analysing , more specifically , the case of the artist duo Jodi .
A proposal document in the documenta archives in Kassel , shows that the creation of a website for the event was already considered in the early stage of the planning for the exhibition .
The choice to assign the curatorial care of the documenta X website to Lamunière was a decisive one .
In a remote area of the blue window , a group of ACSII characters recalled a constellation lost in a blue sky .
follow the modification of its meaning through the successive conversion into different languages .
By doing so , he ensured that the website project would present a selection of the important actors from the new internet art scene , but it would also allow him to venture into a more creative curatorial experiment with artists that he considered capable of providing interesting topics and approaches .
However , these choices only partially explain the selection of the artists for the website project , in particular concerning the artists familiar with this specific medium .
The artists using computers and the Internet represented a growing community and substantial literature on their work was lacking : consequently , it was a difficult decision to choose among them .
The determination to create a combination of artists from the traditional contemporary art field together with the computer art field leaves the question unresolved , and so does the decision to invite artists privileging a creative use of technology , a criterion that could be interpreted in very dissimilar ways .
During a personal interview , Lamunière confirmed to me that the concept of limit was important in both his artistic and in his curatorial work .
I always affirm that I am a ‘fire exit curator’ : I was born on the crossroad of limits."316 The importance of the concept of limit is more explicitly stated in the texts presenting the artists selected for the website project in the short guide .
Lamunière wrote all the texts for the works that he was responsible for .
It appears clear that in many texts , the artist’s works are described in terms of their inclination to play with the limit of the machine .
Moi je dis toujours que je suis un ‘Fire Exit Curator’ .
We can deduce that these characteristics were quite probably the fundamental elements behind the curatorial choices in the selection of the works .
These choices matched the expressed interest of Lamunière for the concept of limit , together with his frequently asserted position that he is interested in art and not in technology per se .
The curating of the website , in addition , was undertaken with the supervision and collaboration of documenta’s artistic director .
Catherine David made it clear that she was rather interested in visions , more than aesthetic questions .
During the press conference presenting the website project , she affirmed that :
New technologies are nothing other than new means to an end .
Alone they are of no significance ; it always depends upon how they are applied .
I am against naive faith in progress , glorification of the possibilities of technological developments .
But I am just as opposed to the denunciation of technology .
Furthermore , David considered that new technologies are only a means to an end , tools that don’t differ from more traditional ones for an artist to operate his or her critical questioning of the ‘anthropological foundations of culture’ .
David’s vision does indeed correspond to Simon Lamunière’s curatorial vision for the website .
Both curators shared the conviction that works of media art that were worthy of being presented not only dealt with formal exercises about the nature of the medium , but rather offered a critical perspective on it .
Through the website irrational.org and the Nettime mailing list , artists such as Heath Bunting , Alexei Shulgin and Vuk Ćosić started to exchange works and ideas on the creative and critical use of the internet .
The information concerning Jodi 's residency is reported in an interview with Tilman Baumgartel in :
Instead of creating a virtual platform to display reproductions of physical works , Jodi conceived a website that functioned as a work in its own , a work that they kept transforming and evolving throughout the years .
The website consists of a collection of pages that became distinctive of Jodi’s aesthetic , exploiting colourful characters , graphical glitches and overlapping images in chaotic compositions that often recall the frozen screens of virus infected computers .
The artists frequently play with the possibilities offered by HTML and the interactive opportunities allowed by the Internet , the content of their website being often fed by other websites’ content and inputs provided by visitors .
Among the first online work created by Jodi is a black page filled with an apparently illogical sequence of bright green ASCII characters , mostly dots and slashes .
The sequence of characters completely fills the screen from side to side and from top to bottom .
The source code of the web page is the written instruction of the page , following a specific syntax that organises the final output and functionality of the page .
The exploration of the source code of any given webpage would provide an informed user of the organization of the page and the instruction that operates it .
To any other visitor , the source code would appear as a sequence of instructions in a markup language , usually HTML .
Not in the case of this specific work by Jodi : in opening the source code , the work fully reveals itself to the visitor .
In fact , the artist has written the source code rather , they have drawn it with ASCII characters - without any concern for the result that it would generate .
They did not intend to use the code as a functional tool to instruct the website .
This early work reveals Jodi’s intention to invert the usual functioning and experience of the Internet and computing machine , by hiding the work where it is not expected .
also shows how the artists subvert the technology to their own ends : instead of complying with the language of the machine , they use it as a creative space .
Furthermore , they invite the user to go beyond their habitual experience of the Internet and , to look behind the surface .
It is quite suggestive that the image discovered in the source code represents the plans of a nuclear bomb , possibly an allusion to the military research that underlies the development of information technologies .
These aspects of their work satisfy the generally accepted definition of generative art.326 It is not a surprise that the generative properties of many works created by Jodi have been pointed out , for example by Florian Cramer,327 although their pioneering position as internet artists has been preferred in the discussion of their work .
The people at the other computer terminal feel this rage .
It is obvious that our work turns against High Tech .
We also fight against the computer on a graphical level."329 From these paragraphs , it appears clear that the artists are not motivated by a fascination for the technologies that they decided to work with , but rather by anger and frustration concerning their overwhelming importance in our everyday life .
It is interesting to note that their action against the technology is not only performed on a conceptual level but is sustained by the formal approach of the artists against the graphical norms of computers and the popular , commercial applications that dominate their use .
The fight that the artists are undertaking against the machine has to be experienced in a particular context : their work needs to be experienced individually , with a personal computer .
Although the artists have been invited to participate in solo and group exhibitions in many international institutions , they consider that their works are best experienced at home .
In the first interview with Tilman Baumgaertel , they state : The Internet is the environment in which our work must be displayed .
We are working with the connection speed of the Internet , or rather , with the connection slowness .
Die Leute am anderen Ende , am empfangenden Computer , spüren diese Wut .
Es ist offensichtlich , dass sich unsere Arbeit gegen High Tech richtet .
Und wir kämpfen auch auf graphischer Ebene gegen den Computer .
To further support the argument that their work needs to be experienced individually , Jodi constantly update their website .
Their main argument is that their work takes place in the computer , hence the personal relation of the user with the machine plays a significant role in their work .
It is its ontological location : a work by Jodi doesn’t exist anywhere else .
The work taking place in the artist’s machine or in the viewer’s one is the same and it wouldn’t make any sense to speak of an original and a copy .
Jodi’s website plays with the anticipations and fears of the spectator as he comfortably surfs on the web on his personal computer .
Although in reality inoffensive , Jodi’s work destabilizes the viewer by exploiting the formal elements that characterise crashes and virus infections .
Das ginge verloren , wenn es auf einer CD-ROM wäre .
The analysis of Jodi’s works and ideas clearly show that the internet was the appropriate place to present the artists selected by Simon Lamunière for the media art section of documenta X. This is particularly true for the work of Jodi , but similar conclusions could be made for the other selected works .
Consequently , the media art works would be presented in close proximity to the symbolic heart of the documenta , given that the tenth edition was strongly focused on ideas and debates .
The question of how to present works created with a computer and to be viewed on a computer , additionally exploiting the interactivity of the Internet , has certainly gone through many discussions and difficult decisions .
Each table was provided with a computer and a monitor , together with a file holder displaying the documentation of the artists .
The room was conceived by Heimo Zobernig , who created a closed space , in which the walls were painted in ultramarine blue .
This paragraph confirms the intention to create a neutral space for the presentation of works of computer art. Once open to the public , the showroom conceived by Zobernig was quickly associated with an office space , not without criticism from some of the journalists that described it .
For Catherine David , it was important that the works of computer art were part of the show .
Die Präsentation der ' immaterialen ' Netzkunst stellt Ausstellungskuratoren von vollkommen neue Probleme .
manage all the correspondence with the artists involved in the media art project .
The decision to create a showroom similar to an office was in part dictated by finance and space availability , it was nonetheless a curatorial decision .
Simon Lamunière clearly did not intend to create a metaphor of the Internet with a theatrical setting ; he wasn’t interested in creating a place resembling a futuristic stage .
I wanted to create a very simple environment resembling either an office or a library."339 This description supports the hypothesis that the curator desired to avoid any association with a technophile ideology , for his media art exhibition .
The simplicity of the Internet showroom corresponded to the general curatorial aesthetic of documenta which privileged content over form , discourse over aesthetic celebration .
An additional concern that the curator had to face , however , was the online connection itself .
The question was whether the work presented in the showroom should be actually connected to the Internet , during the opening hours of the exhibition .
Some of the works selected could easily be presented off-line , with little modification to their original presentation in a web environment , but some would lose their distinctive character .
This was particularly true for Jodi , whose work was not only created for the Internet , but also exploited web resources to generate its chaotic output .
The generative aspect of the work by Jodi , which was the aesthetic characteristic of their work , required an Internet connection to function .
The logical solution was then to supply an online connection and allow the work to function as intended .
sponsors IBM and SBK Software + Systeme , who provided financial and technical support for the event , motivated by the fact that the Internet project was an important and innovative feature of the tenth edition of documenta .
The final decision reached by the curators , however , opposed the installation of an active online connection for the benefit of those works presented in the showroom .
In the end , there was no connection and the works were shown off-line , with the content locally stored in the hard disk of the computers .
The controversial decision to present the works off-line , was indeed made for curatorial reasons instead of technical ones .
Simon Lamunière feared that the showroom would become an Internet cafe in which visitors would rather read their emails and surf the web , instead of consulting the works .
He wanted the spectators to focus on the media art works , not on the Internet .
By refusing to provide an Internet connection , while simulating it and having all the data stored in each hard drive , the curator ensured that the public would concentrate exclusively on the selected works .
This curatorial strategy reflects Lamunière’s opinion that computer art should be discussed and exhibited under the same conditions of presentation used in the visual arts .
In addition , Simon Lamunière had another concern , namely that the website would be attacked by hackers .
Nevertheless , it was a concern that played a role in his decision to keep the works offline in the hall .
Despite the decision to exhibit the work offline , the presentation of the artists whose work appeared on the website went ahead in the documenta-Halle , and their presence
The artists changed the links to the institutions appearing in the original maps and replaced them with websites dedicated to alternative and creative uses of the Internet .
The website was structured in a rather functional way , with pictograms composed by the curator , allowing a fairly intuitive navigation .
As a pioneering example of a website presenting these specific works of art , it would have been advisable to keep the website online after the exhibition in Kassel had ended , thereby providing an online documentation of the works .
Nevertheless , the website was closed at the end of the event .
It was therefore a logical decision for Simon Lamunière and Catherine David to close the site .
In their view , although it might appear to be a contradiction , the decision to close the website was intended as a means to better preserve it .
exhibition , the content of the website was transferred and stored in a CD-ROM , produced by documenta in several editions available for purchase .
He also intended to preserve the site of the documenta , the works created for it and at the same time to elicit debate on the problematic position of artists engaging with ephemeral media such as computers and the Internet .
Simon Lamunière and Bernd Leifeld , the managing director of documenta X , discussed the fact in a series of email exchanges.345 The managing director questioned if the act by the Slovenian artist was an act of piracy and whether the Institution should prosecute the artist .
The dialogue between prominent personalities in the media art world and traditional institutions of art was evidently not without friction even in the nineties .
What was the reception of the event on a more qualitative level ?
How were the works of computer art presented in the showroom of the documenta-Halle - in particular the work by Jodi - critically received by press from the art world and in general ?
Analysis of the articles written during the documenta X exhibition provides some answers to these questions .
The most recurrent objection to David’s curatorial approach was that she gave too much emphasis to concept and content at the expense of form and aesthetic .
documenta X was sometimes criticised as being too pretentious , sometimes too obscure , while others even considered it boring or lacking artistic interest .
The information concerning the number of visitors and the total budget are indicated in the official website of the documenta Archive : http://www.kassel.de/miniwebs/documentaarchiv_e/08205/index.html .
The important involvement of photography , video and computer art - whose presence at documenta X was perceived as disproportionate compared to more traditional techniques - fitted an approach more oriented towards questions related to documenting and investigating contemporary society , which was valued by the curator .
Catherine David : No , it’s not true at all .
I think we did the opposite of a technological show , and I hope that we worked carefully enough that the question of technology versus art won’t be relevant .
That’s a very old debate , and we’ve been neither naively pro-technology nor have we been treating new media as the contemporary incarnation of Satan .
The technological inclination of the documenta X exhibition might have been exaggerated by journalists and dismissed by Catherine David , nonetheless the media art room curated by Simon Lamunière was indeed an exercise in the presentation of media art work to a wider public .
Several local newspapers dedicated an article to the website project , mainly after its presentation during the press conference .
Very often , these articles simply report the information about the project without providing any elaborate criticism .
This is possibly due to the lack of a theoretical framework , which would have allowed for an analysis of the computer art works presented .
positions in the general press , venture into a deeper analysis of the project .
Quivering video clips and flashing English texts are sorely missing a formal layout."355 These examples show that , for the most part , the works of computer art selected for the website and showroom were criticized by journalists from non-specialised media .
Vielleicht doch besser , wir reisen live und höchstselbst und lassen uns von der Wirklichkeit im realen Kassel überraschen .
Zitternde Videoclips und vorbeiflitzende englische Texte lassen formale Gestaltung schmerzlich vermissen .
The description of the work by Jodi was often limited to the photo legend .
The press specialised in contemporary art was even more explicit in its positive response to the work of Jodi .
For many years , Jodi’s website has been considered among the most interesting , curious and best ones .
What is interesting to retain , particularly from the articles that dedicated a few lines of comment to Jodi 's work , is that it is precisely their subversive approach to computer technology that is usually stressed as interesting and innovative .
It is probable that the reaction of the press was in part influenced by the curatorial positions divulged during the press release and in the short guide presenting the works .
However , it also confirms that works of computer art were ready to be accepted within a cultural show as long they presented an ironic and playful critique of modern technologies and machines .
If Jodi’s contribution to the documenta X received favourable reviews both from the general press as well as from the specialised one , the reaction of the artists themselves concerning the presentation of their work has been a different one .
by Simon Lamunière hosted a forum in which artists , critics and the public were invited to post comments on the event .
Net.projects do n't need such metaphors when presented in real-space exhibits , as tv-monitors do n't need a home-decor around them for viewing video .
The artists are obviously unhappy with the presentation of their work , from their comment it appears clear that they considered the presentation at documenta and its setting to be inappropriate .
They also complained about having not been consulted by the curator .
Yet , in Jodi’s opinion , the office setting was not the proper one .
Nevertheless , for a presentation of their work in an exhibition space another solution was necessary .
What would have been the suitable solution for the artists ?
During an interview with Tilman Baumgaertel , reproduced on the mailing list Nettime , Dirk Paesmans is questioned about alternative ways of presenting their work in a physical place .
The artist emphasised the importance of collaboration with the artists involved , instead of mandating the conception of the setting to another artist such as Heimo Zobernig , as was the case in Kassel .
In his words : I personally think that if you have a space and decide to show net works , you can also present it to people who are not used to computers .
And you could also give the artists the opportunity to add things to their installation .
I think it is very important for net artists to deal with the presentation , or they will be represented by other people ; for example , designers who are asked to design to exhibition space .
The real space is of course much more powerful than all these networks .
When you are viewing the work you are in the real space .
If you only do your work on the net , you become a fragment of the local situation and you can 370 easily become manipulated in any direction .
Jodi’s concern about the presentation of their work in the documenta-Halle was perceived as even more disappointing because it was the first important occurrence of a presentation of works of Internet art in an international context .
Since there is practically no critical context for net.art , we have really a big mess in this kind of approach and selection .
It is from the artist 's corner , more particularly the artists engaged in the emerging Internet art cluster , that disapproval of curatorial choices concerning the selection and presentation of the works was strongest .
Reproductions of their work were published both in the general and dedicated press who seem to have appreciated and correctly interpreted their defiant use of media technologies .
Jodi’s website was characterised as ironic , amusing , playful and even subversive .
How significant was Jodi’s participation in documenta for their future career ?
The Jury supported the decision with the following statement : JODI are among the first to do ' field research ' in the realm of digital data .
The Internet became a popular topic at the end of the millennium and several exhibitions and publications were created to present a selection of artists , in which Jodi were often involved .
Rebellen im Internet."375 Jodi were invited to contribute to the edition with images from their website that would run all through the content of the edition , providing the visual background of many articles .
The majority of works that were presented at documenta X , including the work by Jodi , were mentioned in the chronology of the publication .
The exhibition was completed with a first monograph publication of their work , edited by Annette Schindler and Tilman Baumgaertel .
In the publication , Jodi were presented as a new generation of media artists .
established very quickly after the first international presentation of their work at documenta .
It is difficult to appreciate the role played by the website project at documenta X in the career of the artists , but the response of the press , the prize at ZKM and the invitations to participate in many exhibitions and publications that multiplied in the following years suggest that documenta X has played a significant role for Jodi .
On the other hand , if Jodi became an iconic duo in the new media art scene and are still considered among the few pioneers that shaped the emerging net.art movement , their success was often circumscribed to the new media art field .
Analysis of their recent biography mentions some participation in important institutions such as the Centre Pompidou in Paris , Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam and New Modern Museum in New York .
Nevertheless , these participations were usually smaller contributions to group shows or activities thematically centred on new technologies : the great majority of the exhibitions to which Jodi participated in the years after documenta X were hosted by institutions specifically dedicated to media art. The media showroom in Kassel provided a chance for media artists such as Jodi to enter the door of the traditional art circuit .
In other words , can they be co-opted into the traditional art system ?
Particular value was given to an approach that presented a critical and even subversive position towards the technologies used .
From the analysis of the presentation of the works and their integration in the main exhibition curated by Catherine David , it appears that the artistic director considered the participation of media artists at documenta to be important , nevertheless she affirmed very clearly that works should not be divided by techniques and that the works of computer art created for the website should be integrated into the show .
The presence of media work was furthermore supported by important sponsors that contributed financially and with technical backing to the realisation of the event .
However , the website project and showroom was not directly curated by Catherine David , it was delegated to Simon Lamunière .
Additionally , the showroom was conceived at the last moment and relegated to a place that the artists deemed inappropriate .
No online connection was made available for works that needed it and the website was taken down at the end of the event .
Furthermore , the invitation extended to media artists to engage with online works on the event’s website that year was never repeated in the following editions of the event .
The positive reaction of the press did not match the reaction of the artists who clearly
expressed their dissatisfaction concerning the presentation of their work , in particular the presentation in the physical spaces of the exhibition .
Against the wishes of the artists , the decisions to display the works offline and to close the website after the show , suggest that there was a lack of dialogue or agreement between the artists involved and the curator .
Jodi rapidly established themselves as pioneers and leading artists working with computers and the Internet .
Furthermore , the analysis of Jodi 's participation in the documenta exhibition allows for more general considerations regarding the controversial relationship between new media art and the traditional field of established contemporary art institutions to be inferred .
Although artistic experiments with new technologies were not an invention of the nineties , it is during these years that new media art was clearly recognised as a specific approach .
New media art was not simply associated with the use of technologies but was identified as an artistic approach that offered a position , a comment on these technologies , in particular information technologies .
As the documenta case confirms , artists that proposed a critical , subversive approach were privileged by curators and critics who identified their work as being representative of the emerging media art scene .
This hypothesis is sustained by some of the leading critics and curators who , at the turn of the millennium , strongly determined the
association of new media with strategies such as hacktivism , tactical media and critical approaches.380 documenta X marked an important moment in the history of computer and digital art , a moment in which artists overtly manifested a critical position toward information technologies and rather misused them in their work .
most influential media art critics and historians , as I have observed in the analysis of the varied narratives offered to approach computer-generated art in the first chapter .
I am also convinced that this metaphor prevents this specific production from being correctly appreciated by the larger majority of art historians and curators .
While arguing that Anonymous aims at strengthening freedom and democracy , in particular by fighting against the censorship of the internet , the spokesperson affirmed that the movement does not follow a political agenda nor does it comply with a specific ideology .
What is more , he claimed that everyone is part of Anonymous and that everyone is entitled to initiate action within the community , because the movement is not centralized .
I had the chance to put a question to the spokesperson about the criteria concerning the selection of the actions proposed by the members of the community , and whether he considered the absence of a political
agenda upon which the members could discuss and agree as a hindrance to acting democratically in the long term .
The sole unifying vision of the movement , conceded by the spokesperson , was the fight for the freedom of the internet worldwide .
But if Anonymous’s apolitical vision is not entirely convincing , what were the reasons behind the Transmediale Festival’s decision to host a panel dedicated to the movement , other than the obvious purpose of discussing recent media buzz ?
The interest in hacking and cyberactivism is reflected in other important international media art festivals in recent years .
artists engaging with digital media to have an impact on society .
The festival presented symposiums with international guests invited to expose their visions on how the modern technologies could be hacked and exploited to create tools that can help to fight excessive waste production and pollution .
It offered an exhibition of innovative do-it-yourself projects along with another presenting artists , such as Chris Jordan and Cornelia Hesse-Honegger , who take a critical stance on the impact of modern technologies on the environment .
In this case , the strategies of hacking and cyberactivism are not simply discussed as one among the possible topics for the understanding of the contemporary artistic production , they are regarded as an integral and indispensable part of the media art discussion itself .
These examples suggest that the field of media art today favours disruptive strategies and technology criticism , rather than following the aspiration of bridging the humanities and the sciences .
Analysis of the selection process of the artists that participated in this event , clearly demonstrate that the confrontational approach of the artist versus the machine was an important aspect for the curator of the exhibition : the artists selected to participate in this exhibition were mainly chosen because of their rebellious and provocative attitude not only toward the computing machine , but also concerning the implementation of information technologies within the society .
They were not selected because they displayed a profound understanding of computer languages and digital tools , nor because of their ambition to parallel the scientific research .
The artists selected to represent computer art in the last documenta of the century , offered on the contrary a rather pessimistic view of machines and information technologies , as exemplified by the work of Jodi .
But it is not only the association with capitalism and military research that affected the artistic development within this production : the emergence of new scientific fields of research such as artificial life and embodied robotics , with a strong emphasis on the bottom-up approach , certainly contributed to discrediting artificial intelligence research as obsolete and uninteresting : the criticism moved by the partisans of the bottom-up approach against traditional artificial intelligence reiterated the idea that the latter was founded on an archaic vision of the cognitive properties of humans .
Eventually , these unapologetic visions of the computing machine opened the way for the subversive approaches within digital and media art. Cyberactivist strategies in art are not a singular occurrence restricted to the emergence of media art during the nineties : many recent works engage in similar practices .
The project consists of the acquisition of parts of the company 's shares with the money generated by exploiting the AdSense program offered by Google , who pays percentages of its income to individuals accepting to host targeted ads on their websites .
The performative work of Eva and Franco Mattes highlights the cynicism and the immorality pervading these virtual social playgrounds , suggesting that the social networks and online video-games do not offer a chance for a greater dialogue , but rather
Mediengruppe Bitnik , who are arguably among the most prominent artistic collective representing new media art in Switzerland , have turned hacking into their distinctive approach .
Their works consist of interventions that question the violation of privacy allowed by modern technologies .
Mediengruppe Bitnik succeeded in sending a package to Julian Assange , confined in the Ecuadorian embassy in London , using a hidden camera and built-in GPS to track its tortuous trip to its destination .
Although the work intended to test the possibility of contacting a controversial and protected person such as Assange - and at the same time determine the existence of a surveillance system within the postal service - the work implicitly asserted the affiliation of the artistic group with the leader of WikiLeaks and the hacker ideology associated with the organisation .
These younger artists exploit glitches and errors to produce performances , software , videos and musical works that rely on the malfunctioning of computing machines .
For instance , they create videos depicting the chaotic multiplication of icons and folders on a window desk , or musical and visual compositions generated by corrupted files .
Instead of manifesting the will to develop sophisticated programs that employ the computational capabilities of the machines , they rather build upon and emphasize the dysfunctional occurrences of computers and software to create works that are formally surprising and fascinating .
Artist and musician Rosa Menkman , in particular , provided a theoretical discourse for the
development of glitch art as a genre and made it very clear that the artistic intent behind her work was indeed subversive in nature : To some artists , myself included , it has become a personal matter to break the assured informatic flows of media .
However , the inclination of artists to engage with machines with a disruptive approach is not only a consequence of the establishment of the new media art field .
The analysis of the work of Harold Cohen and Edward Ihnatowicz , joined with the considerations of their respective positions through their writings , contradict the idea that they were simply mimicking the scientific research in their works .
Both artists developed their own language and solutions , exploiting the computer to pursue their artistic goals .
However , he strongly disagreed with the methodology of artificial intelligence , the most prominent model of exploiting computers for epistemological goals during his time .
of embodied robotics , he anticipated the same ideas concerning the possibilities of machines to evolve in an open environment .
To consider Ihnatowicz as an artist fascinated with the scientific research of his time would be incorrect .
It is true that Cohen and Ihnatowicz were sincerely attempting to examine emerging behaviours such as intelligence and creativity , by developing a personal and profound understanding of the technologies they used in their artistic production .
Nevertheless , these artists clearly stated their distance from the scientific research of their time and repeatedly affirmed their artistic identity and autonomy .
Critics and historians that have discussed their works have , in my opinion , overstated the association of the artists to this scientific discipline during and after their lifetime .
In conclusion , I argue that the metaphor of bridging the arts and the science is a misleading approach in understanding this form of artistic production in particular and media art in general .
The will to challenge the usual functioning of the machine characterized the production of artists engaged in experimenting with computers .
A change of perspective is needed , in which artists using computers and new media are considered
What is more , the change of perspective regarding this type of artistic production allows us to better understand and finally overcome the so-called digital divide .
The digital divide is a prevailing and ongoing debate among the new media art specialists .
Grant Taylor , while considering recent examples of digital and media art as an evolution of computer art , affirms that this production is still separated from the traditional art world .
I am arguing that the perceived digital divide is badly formulated and further increases the misunderstanding of an important part of the current artistic production .
Firstly , it is important to clarify some of the terms and concepts involved in the debate about the digital divide .
Computer art is related to the artistic production involving the use of a general-purpose programmable machine .
so-called digital divide that concerns the supposed separation of the media art field from the traditional art field .
I do not question that there are critics , curators and artists that work and evolve within this field .
Contemporary art , on an international level , is composed of a large number of actors and overlapping fields .
Although they constitute specific fields , they are nevertheless all part of the contemporary art field .
They deplore the lack of opportunities for media artists to participate and succeed in the traditional circuit of institutions , museums , biennales and commercial galleries that constitute the contemporary art world .
It is precisely against this opinion and the arguments provided to support it , that I argue .
If the terms were used to only identify the artistic production with regard to the devices used by the artists , as I have previously described , the problem would be easily solved .
technologies on our society , rather than with respect to the media used in their practice .
This is what I would call the thematic definition of media art , as opposed to the description based on the nature of the media used .
In truth , the thematic definition allows works of media art to be arbitrarily included and excluded depending on the necessity of the critic or historian to justify his or her arguments .
If we consider recent important international exhibitions , it appears that works using computer and digital media are nevertheless included .
If those might be regarded as historical tributes to pioneering artists engaging with computers , electronics and new media , they contradict or at least weaken the assumption that media art is cut off from the traditional circuit .
Many contemporary artists that use computers and digital media in their practices , such as Cory Arcangel and Wade Guyton , are in fact often exhibited in important international institutions and exhibitions .
It is therefore not the case that new media and digital art is not presented in the contemporary art circuit .
What is nonetheless the case , is that artists who do work with new media and digital technologies and do exhibit within the traditional art circuit are systematically regarded as not being genuine media artists from the majority of critics who support the existence of the digital divide .
Bishop answers her own question by affirming that she can think of only a handful of artists undertaking these tasks , such as Frances Stark , Thomas Hirschhorn and Ryan Trecartin .
Conversely , media art historians today still describe Harold Cohen as an artist who has not been correctly recognised by the traditional field .
It is clear from these examples , that the thematic argument allows for the exclusion of works of media art that are successful in the traditional art world because they would otherwise contradict the thesis that computer art is ignored by the traditional circuit .
In this sense , I consider the thematic definition to be problematic .
In the best case , the thematic definition can be accepted as an attempt to provide a qualitative criterion for the judgment of media art , upon which one might agree or disagree .
In this case , works of media art that offer a reflection on modern technologies and their consequences on our society could be appreciated according to the significance of the discourse proposed by the artist .
However , the thematic definition is not acceptable when determining the inclusion or exclusion of media art works within this kind of artistic production because it does not provide any reliable and objective criteria .
It is an illusion that one could define the necessary content of media artworks .
Similarly , it would be improbable to have content-based prescriptions for a painting , a work of photography or a drawing before accepting these artworks as such .
It appears to me that , when critics and historians attempt to define media art through the content of the works , they are in fact securing their artistic field by prescribing the necessary knowledge required to participate in it .
In this sense media art could be considered a combat term .
The reflection offered by Mitchell G. Ash on the word Pseudowissenschaft might be helpful here .
The understanding of the thematic definition of media art as a case of medium specificity fallacy allows for better understanding of the question concerning the supposed digital divide .
The most frequently recurring arguments offered to explain the divide , as analysed in the first chapter , invoke the lack of a commercial market within the art world and the lack of competences among critics and curators .
I will not discuss the argument concerning the lack of market , since it goes beyond the content of my research .
Furthermore , in his analysis of Internet art , Julian Stallabrass mentions examples of artists selling their works in a variety of ways .
By defining media art works in regard to their supposed thematic-wise specificity and by affirming that knowledge in the field is required to approach such works , the actors working in the media art field not only establish the existence of their field and secure their positions , but they also exclude critics and curators of the traditional art field from discussing and participating in this form of artistic production .
Digital and media artworks are undeniably present in the traditional circuit of fine arts , although I can concede that one might argue about their lower number in relation to the number of works using more traditional media , such as painting .
However , the smaller proportion of computer artworks with respect to paintings and sculptures within the traditional circuit of art museums and galleries could be simply explained as a reduced number of artists working with this media , which leads to a lower number of convincing and exhibition worthy works .
Media art critics insist that digital artworks presented in the traditional circuit differ from authentic media artworks , relying on the thematic definition .
The analysis of the criteria of selection and of the reception of the works of the tenth documenta demonstrates that the critical stance regarding modern technologies rather favoured the inclusion of computer-based works within a traditional institution .
As an alternative to the widespread idea that the mainstream art field excludes new media artworks and artists , I propose to consider that the perceived exclusion is in fact the result of the establishment of the media art field itself .
Certainly , a successful career within the new media art field does n't automatically translate to a successful career in the contemporary art world .
It now appears clear to me that these driving forces are a necessity of the artists engaging with machines to affirm their artistic work independently from the association with modern technologies and scientific research .
My analysis also allowed me to approach the much debated questions of the digital divide .
On several occasions , I had the opportunity to discuss the future of media art with artists , critics and curators involved in and outside of this field .
I have always been surprised when someone expressed his or her
conviction that media and digital art is either doomed to disappear or else to eventually merge with the contemporary art world .
These predictions bear a similar flavour to the ones that announced the end of painting some decades ago .
The parallel existence of dedicated institutions for media art does not contradict this assertion .
These institutions fulfil an important function by supporting artistic productions related to new media and modern technologies , as long as they allow works to be presented and discussed regardless of their supposed medium specificity .
Critics and curators engaging with computer , digital and media art should learn to appreciate these types of productions for their artistic qualities , rather than focusing only on modern technologies as a topic and as a celebration of a supposed marriage between the arts and the sciences .
Brooks , Rodney A. Robot : The Future of Flesh and Maschines .
Brooks , Rodney A. The Artificial Life Route to Artificial Intelligence : Building Embodied , Situated Agents .
Art & Consciousness in the Post-Biological Era , edited by Roy Ascott .
Burnham , Jack W. Beyond Modern Sculpture : The Effects of Science and Technology on the Sculpture of This Century .
Emergence and Embodiment : New Essays on Second-Order Systems Theory .
From Energy to Information : Representation in Science and Technology , Art , and Literature .
The First Artificial Intelligence Coloring Book : Art and Computers .
Anonymous in Context : The Politics and Power Behind the Mask .
Digital Narrative , Holism , and the Romance of the Real .
AI : The Tumultuous History of the Search for Artificial Intelligence .
Put on your blue genes : BioTech-Kunst und die Verheissungen der Biotechnologie .
Dreyfus , Hubert L. , Stuart E. Dreyfus and Tom Athanasiou .
Mind Over Machine : The Power of Human Intuition and Expertise in the Era of the Computer .
Darwin Among the Machines : The Evolution of Global Intelligence .
Alternative Modernity : The Technical Turn in Philosophy and Social Theory .
Elephants in the Attic : The Autobiography of James Gardner .
Halacy , D S. Charles Babbage , Father of the Computer .
Simians , Cyborgs and Women : The Reinvention of Nature .
The postmodern turn : essays in postmodern theory and culture .
How We Became Posthuman : Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics , Literature , and Informatics .
The Machine as seen at the end of the mechanical age .
Ihnatowicz , Edward Portrait Of The Artist As An Engineer .
Luci E Ombre Di Google : Futuro E Passato Dell'industria Dei Metadati .
Internet Art : The Online Clash of Culture and Commerce .
Krauss , Rosalind E. A Voyage on the North Sea : Art in the Age of the Post-Medium Condition .
Landers , Richard R. Man 's Place in the Dybosphere .
MacGowan , Roger and Frederick Ordway , Intelligence in the Universe .
One-dimensional Man : Studies in the Ideology of Advanced Industrial Society .
Maturana , Humberto R. and Francisco J. Varela The Tree of Knowledge : The Biological Roots of Human Understanding .
Meta-Art , Artificial intelligence , and the Work of Harold Cohen .
Minsky , Marvin L. The Emotion Machine : Commonsense Thinking .
Moravec , Hans P. Mind Children : The Future of Robot and Human Intelligence .
The Net Delusion : How Not to Liberate the World .
Nelkin , Dorothy and Suzanne Anker The molecular gaze : art in the genetic age .
Second natures : faculty exhibition of the UCLA Design/Media Arts department , Eli & Edythe Broad Arts Center .
Cybernetic Serendipity : The Computer and the Arts : a Studio International Special Issue .
The art of artificial evolution , a handbook on evolutionary art and music .
m.any : application of generative and cellular structures in architecture .
Media-art-history : Media Museum , Zkm , Center for Art and Media Karlsruhe .
Scott , Felicity D. Architecture or techno-utopia : politics after modernism .
Smith , Brian R. Soft Computing : Art and Design .
Takeover : Who 's Doing the Art of Tomorrow = Wer Macht Die Kunst Von Morgen .
The global genome : biotechnology , politics , and culture .
The Oxford Companion to Philosophy , edited by Ted Honderich .
Computer Power and Human Reason : From Judgment to Calculation .
Cybernetics : Or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine .
The Human Use of Human Beings : Cybernetics and Society .
Information Arts : Intersections of Art , Science , and Technology .
He was curator at Duplex in Geneva , I Sotterranei dell’Arte in Monte Carasso and assistant curator at Kunsthalle Fribourg and Kunsthalle Zurich .
DECS , Repubblica e Cantone Ticino Member of the Fine Arts Committee .
Pro Helvetia , Zurich Member of the Board of Trustees .
“Being immortal , again.” During the exhibition Spooky Action at a Distance .
Artes Mechanicae & Witch 's Cradle , Corner College , Zurich .
“Cranky Bytes” During the exhibition Quantum of Disorder , Museum Haus Konstruktiv , Zurich .
“Hacking strategies in media art” Whitewashing piracy / Normalcy , Royal Institute of Art , Stockholm .
“Should generative art be political?” XV Generative Art Conference , Lucca .
