In the teaching of the Arts we have often failed to create an awareness of a dynamic tradition with achieved work and a variety of genres and conventions .
In English there has been , until recently , a marked tendency to favour a kind of sociological realism and to confine work to the discussion of its most obvious social messages .
Both of these movements in different ways , and for different reasons , served to disrupt and discredit the continuity of artistic traditions .
Philosophy severed from literary criticism is as monstrous a thing as literary criticism severed from philosophy .
In each case the result is a kind of intellectual masquerade , a phantom world of discourse , whose principal subject-matter is itself .
In philosophy , as in literary criticism , the written word has largely ceased to address itself to living creatures .
Only if it contains a theoretical truth , therefore—a truth to be measured by the exacting requirements of the sciences—can philosophy be justified .
This partly explains the peculiar affectation of scientific language on the part of many modern philosophers—even though the real hard work of science lies beyond their competence .
The Quest for Aesthetic Value It is the second difference between the seventeenth-century philosopher and his contemporary descendant that interests me .
In Kant ’ s Critique of Judgment the point is already explicitly made , that the sense of God ’ s immanence—the sense of the world as created , and of personality as shining forth from all its aspects—is to be derived from the very same faculty which has beauty as its object and judgment as its goal .
It is through aesthetic contemplation that we confront that aspect of the world which was the traditional concern of theology .
Conversation might well provide a tempting taste of a philosophy which already has a place in history .
We wish to acknowledge our indebtedness to Professor Glenn Gray for many valuable suggestions which have materially improved the translation .
We thank him for these and for much other help in this enterprise .
We are indebted to the Central Fund for Research of The Pennsylvania State University for grants which made possible the completion of this work .
There are many who resist a certain kind of philosophy .
They find it hard to enjoy , abstract , and apparently of no great practical value .
There have always been such people in the various epochs of human history , just as there have always been those who find the revelations of speculative thinking to be of utmost importance .
In early Hindu thought , for example , the contrast between the beast fable and the Upanishads reflects this difference in outlook .
One can say that it wasn ’ t a collective action per se .
Interestingly enough , the entrance to the exhibition had an age restriction ( because of the explicit nature of some works ) .
Of course , I realize that to hold such views seriously today is a luxury , and that to lament the passing of the East bloc is enabled by temporal and cultural distance .
Later in the book she writes of the Ostalgie as this nostalgia for a socialist past is known in Germany .
Bereś repeatedly drew attention to the objectification of nature in industrial societies .
So much so , that the affirmation of nature was the end point towards which the dialogues seemed to proceed .
These events were followed by the devastating earthquake with enormous causalities shook the country .
The urban space became an arena flooded with social unrest , nationalist sentiments , preparation for war and refugees .
Along with all this there were the coffins of the victims of the earthquake on the cars passing by .
I have used the term appropriation above for the co-option of a sign to consumerism .
The reference is anachronistic but supports a possibility for re-reading signs , and a re-contextualization of the de-contextualized sign as an intentional act .
But this does not mean everything is fake ; more that a grey area exists between the authentic and the equally impossible inauthentic .
Baudrillard does not see consumers , anyway , as hapless dupes of a system but as able to engage it .
The Frauenkirche in Dresden , the Augenstern city of East Germany , was almost completely destroyed in the end of WWII .
The baroque church was kept as a ruin and declared a Mahnmal1 during the GDR times .
