The question what is life, says Norman O. Brown, turns out to be the question what is sleep. We perceive that the sky exists only on earth. Evolution and human nature are mutually exclusive concepts. We're in transition from the Industrial Age to the Cybernetic Age, characterized by many as the post-Industrial Age. But I've found the term Paleocybernetic valuable as a conceptual tool with which to grasp the significance of our present environment: combining the primitive potential associated with Paleolithic and the transcendental integrities of "practical utopianism" associated with Cybernetic. So I call it the Paleocybernetic Age: an image of a hairy, buckskinned, barefooted atomic physicist with a brain full of mescaline and logarithms, working out the heuristics of computer-generated holograms or krypton laser interferometry. It's the dawn of man: for the first time in history we'll soon be free enough to discover who we are.

Radical Evolution and Future Shock
in the Paleocybernetic Age It is perhaps not coincidental that Western youth has discovered the
I Ching, or Book of Changes, on a somewhat popular level as wemove into the final third of the twentieth century. Change is now ouronly constant, a global institution. The human ecological biosphere isundergoing its second great transition, destined to be even moreprofound than the invention of agriculture in the Neolithic Age. If wecan't see the change, at least we can feel it. Future shock affects ourpsyche and our economy just as culture shock disorients the PeaceCorps worker in Borneo.It is said that we are living in a period of revolution. But nothingsells like freedom: Revolution is big business. As the physicist P. W.Bridgman once said, the true meaning of a term is found byobserving what a man does with it, not what he says about it. Sincethe phenomenon we call revolution is worldwide, and since it's felt inevery human experience, perhaps we might think of it not asrevolution but as radical evolution. Revolution is basically the samewhether defined by Marx or the I Ching: removal of the antiquated.But revolution replaces one status quo with another. Radicalevolution is never static; it's a perpetual state of polarization. Wecould think of it as involuntary revolution, but whatever terminologywe apply that's the condition of the world today, the environment withwhich the artist must work. Radical evolution would be kinder if itwere better understood; but it won't be so long as commercialentertainment cinema continues to representa "reality" that doesn'texist.Sociologist Alvin Toffler has stressed ephemerality as a chiefaspect of radical evolution: "Smith Brothers Cough Drops, CalumetBaking Soda, Ivory Soap, have become institutions by virtue of theirlong reign in the marketplace. In the days ahead, few products willenjoy such longevity. Corporations may create new productsknowing full well they'll remain on the market for only a matter of afew weeks or months. By extension, the corporations themselves—as well as unions, government agencies and all other organizations—may either have shorter life-spans or be forced to undergoincessant and radical reorganization. Rapid decay and regenerationwill be the watchwords of tomorrow."8 Toffler observes that noreasonable man should plan his life beyond ten years; even that, hesays, is risky. When parents speak of their sons becoming lawyersthey are deceiving themselves and their sons, according to thesociologist, "Because we have no conception of what being a lawyerwill mean twenty years hence. Most probably, lawyers will becomputers." In fact, we can't be sure that some occupations willeven exist when our children come of age. For example, thecomputer programmer, a job first created in the 1950's, will be asobsolete as the blacksmith within a decade; computers will reprogram and even regenerate themselves (IBM recently announceda new computer that repairs itself).John McHale, coauthor of the World Design Science Decadedocuments with Buckminster Fuller, emphasizes expendability andimpermanence in radical evolution: "Use value is replacingownership value. For example, the growth of rental and services—not only in automobiles and houses, but from skisto bridal gowns toheirloom silver, castles and works of art... our personal and household objects, when destroyed physically or outmoded symbolically,may be replaced by others exactly similar. A paper napkin, a suit, achair, an automobile, are items with identical replacement value.Metals in a cigarette lighter today may be, within a month or year,part of an auto, lipstick case or orbiting satellite... the concept ofpermanence in no way enables one to relate adequately to ourpresent situation." 9McHale has seen the need for a totally new world view as radicalevolution speeds farther from our grasp. "There's a mythologyabroad which equates the discovery and publication of newfacts with new knowledge. Knowledge is not simply accumulated facts butthe reduction of unrelated and often apparently irrelevant facts intonew conceptual wholes."10 He's talking about completely new ways of looking at the world and everything in it. This is proposition farmore profound than mere political revolution, which Krishnamurti hascharacterized as "The modification of the right according to the ideasof the left.''11 The new consciousness transcends both right and left.We must redefine everything.What happens to our definition of "intelligence" when computers,as an extension of the human brain, are the same size, weight, andcost as transistor radios? They're being developed through themicroelectronics process of Large-Scale Integration.What happens to our definition of "morality" when biochemists areabout to unravel the secrets of the DNA/RNA interaction mechanismto create human life?What happens to our definition of "man" when our next doorneighbor is a cyborg (a human with inorganic parts)? There areseveral crude cyborgs in the world today.What happens to our definition of "environment" when our videoextensions bring us the reality of the solar system daily? What do wemean by "nature" under these circumstances? (McLuhan: "The firstsatellite ended nature in the conventional sense.")What happens to our definition of "creativity" when a computerasks itself an original question without being programmed to do so?This has occurred several times.What happens to our definition of "family" when the intermedianetwork brings the behavior of the world into our home, and whenwe can be anywhere in the world in a few hours?What happens to our definition of "progress" when, according toLouis Pauwels: "For the really attentive observer the problems facingcontemporary intelligence are no longer problems of progress. Theconcept of progress has been dead for some years now. Today it is aquestion of a change of state, a transmutation.''12 Or Norbert Wiener:"Simple faith in progress is not a conviction belonging to strength butone belonging to acquiescence and hence to weakness.'' What happens to our definitions of "material" and "spiritual" whenscience has found no boundary between the two? Although it is stillpopularly assumed that the world is divided into animate andinanimate phenomena, virologists working at the supposed thresholdbetween life and nonlife at the virus level have in fact discovered nosuch boundary. "Both animate and inanimate have persisted rightacross yesterday's supposed threshold in both directions...subsequently what was animate has become foggier and foggier...no life, per se, has been isolated.''14 Indeed, what becomes of "reality" itself as science expands itsmastery of the forces of the universe? "The paradox of twentiethcentury science consists of its unreality in terms of sense impressions. Dealing as it does in energy transformation and submicroscopic particles, it has become a kind of metaphysics practiced by adevoted priestly cult—totally as divorced from the common-sensenotions of reality as was the metaphysics practiced by witch doctorsand alchemists. It is not at all odd, then, to discover that the closerwe come via the scientific method to 'truth,' the closer we come tounderstanding the 'truth' symbolized in myths.''15 This, then, is merely a superficial glimpse at some of the phenomena that characterize the Paleocybernetic Age. Quite clearly manis in the paradoxical position of existing in a state of consciousnesswithout being able to understand it. Man does not comprehend hisrelationship to the universe, either physical or metaphysical. Heinsists on "doing his thing" without the slightest notion of what his"thing" might be. This cosmic credibility gap exists primarily betweenthe facts of scientific experience and the illusions of environmentalconditioning as manifested in the global intermedia network.
The Intermedia Network as Nature The point I wish to make here is obvious yet vital to anunderstanding of the function of art in the environment, even thoughit is consistently ignored by the majority of film critics. It's the ideathat man is conditioned by his environment and that "enviromnent"for contemporary man is the intermedia network. We are conditionedmore by cinema and television than by nature. Once we've agreedupon this, it becomes immediately obvious that the structure andcontent of popular cinema is a matter of cardinal importance, at leastas serious as most political issues, and thus calls for comment notfrom journalists but from those who work at the matter, artiststhemselves.The cinema isn't just something inside the environment; theintermedia network of cinema, television, radio, magazines, books,and newspapers is our environment, a service environment thatcarries the messages of the social organism. It establishes meaningin life, creates mediating channels between man and man, man andsociety. "In earlier periods such traditional meaning and valuecommunication was carried mainly in the fine and folk arts. But todaythese are subsumed amongst many communicating modes. Theterm 'arts' requires expansion to include those advanced technological media which are neither fine nor folk.''16 We've seen the need for new concepts regarding the nature ofexistence; yet concepts are expanded or constricted in direct relationto the relevancy of prevailing languages. In a world where change isthe only constant, it's obvious we can't afford to rely on traditionalcinematic language. The world has changed immeasurably in theseventy years since the birth of cinema: for one thing "world" nowincludes the microcosm of the atom and the macrocosm of the universe in one spectrum. Still popular films speak a languagedeveloped by Griffith, Lumière, Méliès, derived from traditions ofvaudeville and literature.In the Agricultural Age man was totally passive, conditioned andvictimized by the environment. In the Industrial Age man's role was participatory; he became more aggressive and successful in hisattempts to control his environment. We're now moving into theCybernetic Age in which man learns that to control his environmenthe must cooperate with it; he not only participates but actuallyrecreates his environment both physical and metaphysical, and inturn is conditioned by it.To be free of the toil of old relationships we must first be free of theconditioning that instills it within us. As radical evolution gainsmomentum the need to unlearn our past becomes increasingly clear:contemporary life is a process of miseducation/uneducation/reeducation, at a cost of much precious time. McLuhan has noted thatthe true significance of Pavlov's experiments was that any controlledman-made environment is a conditioner that creates "non-perceptivesomnambulists." Since then science has discovered that "molecularmemory" is operative in single-celled and some multi-celledorganisms, and there's evidence that memory-in-the-flesh exists inhumans as well. Biochemists have proven that learned responses toenvironmental stimuli are passed on phylogenetically fromgeneration to generation, encoded in the RNA of the organism'sphysical molecular structure.17 And what could be a more powerfulconditioning force than the intermedia network, which functions toestablish meaning in life?Science has proven that there's no such thing as "human nature."Just as water takes the shape of its container, so human nature isrelative to its past and present conditioning. Optimum freedom ofbehavior and increased self-awareness are implicit in the industrialequation that is trending toward physical success for all men;Paleocybernetic man, however, has not learned to control the environment he creates. "The content of what is available for emulationon the part of the young in each society is itself culturally shapedand limited... the individual typically remains, throughout his lifetime,unaware of how his own habits, which to him appear 'only natural,' infact result from a learning process in which he never had anopportunity to attempt alternative responses.''18 This process is fortunate to have a tool that makes him awareof his own enculturation and thus he enjoys greater psychic freedomthan his ancestors. This tool is what Teilhard de Chardin has calledthe noosphere, the film of organized intelligence that encircles theplanet, superposed on the living layer of the biosphere and thelifeless layer of inorganic material, the lithosphere. The minds ofthree-and-a-half-billion humans—twenty-five percent of all humanswho ever lived—currently nourish the noosphere; distributed aroundthe globe by the intermedia network, it becomes a new "technology"that may prove to be one of the most powerful tools in man's history.John McHale: "World communications... diffuse and interpenetratelocal cultural tradition, providing commonly-shared culturalexperience in a manner unparalleled in human history. Within thisglobal network the related media share and transmit man's symbolicneeds and their expression on a world scale. Besides theenlargement of the physical world, these media virtually extend ourpsychical environment, providing a constant stream of moving,fleeting images of the world for our daily appraisal. They provide
psychic mobility for the greater mass of our citizens. Through thesedevices we can telescope time, move through history, and span theworld in a great variety of unprecedented ways.'' 19Like all energy sources the noosphere can be used for negativepurposes. Its resources can be manipulated to disguise craft ascreativity, especially in these Paleocybernetic days when we're stillimpressed by the sudden influx of information. Fuller hasdifferentiated craft from industry by demonstrating that craft isinherently local in technique and effect whereas industry is inherentlycomprehensive and universal in technique and effect. One mightmake a similar analogy between entertainment and art: entertainment is inherently "local," that is, of limited significance, whereasart is inherently universal and of unlimited significance. Too oftentoday we find that so-called artists working in the intermedia network are little more than adroit imitators, collectors of data andphenomena, which they glean from the noosphere and amalgamateinto packages that are far from whole. They're clever and glib;they've made an art of selling themselves, but they know only effect,not cause; they are merchants of mannerisms.It is precisely this confusion that clouds critical appraisal of"content" in the popular arts. All too frequently eclectic thinking isconfused with creative thinking. The distinction is subtle to be sure:integrative thinking can be the highest form of creativity. Indeed bothart and science function to reveal similarities within an a prioriuniverse of apparent dissimilarities. As with all else, however, there'san art and a craft to thinking, and the popular entertainments remainat the craft level by the very nature of their purpose.The intermedia network has made all of us artists by proxy. Adecade of television-watching is equal to a comprehensive course indramatic acting, writing, and filming. Compressed in such constantand massive dosage, we begin to see the methods and clichés moreclearly; the mystique is gone—we could almost do it ourselves.Unfortunately too many of us do just that: hence the glut of submediocre talent in the entertainment industry. Paradoxically thisphenomenon carries with it the potential of finally liberating cinemafrom its umbilical to theatre and literature, since it forces the moviesto expand into ever more complex areas of language andexperience. Evidence of television's effect on the cinema is alreadyapparent, as we shall see in our discussion of synaesthetic cinema.From another more immediate perspective, however, it is quiteunfortunate. We live in an age of hyperawareness, our sensesextended around the globe, but it's a case of aesthetic overload: ourtechnological zeal has outstripped our psychic capacity to cope withthe influx of information. We are adrift on the surface of radicalevolution unable to plumb the depths of its swift and turbulentcurrent.
The current generation is engaged in an unprecedented questioningof all that has been held essential. We question traditional conceptsof authority, ownership, justice, love, sex, freedom, politics, eventradition itself. But it's significant that we don't question ourentertainment. The disenfranchised young man who dropped out ofcollege, burned his draft card, braids his hair, smokes pot, and digsDylan is standing in line with his girl, who takes the pill, waiting tosee The Graduate or Bonnie and Clyde or Easy Rider— and they'rereacting to the same formulas of conditioned response that lulledtheir parents to sleep in the 1930's.We've seen the urgent need for an expanded cinematic language. Ihope to illustrate that profit-motivated commercial entertainment, byits very nature, cannot supply this new vision. Commercialentertainment works against art, exploits the alienation and boredomof the public, by perpetuating a system of conditioned response toformulas. Commercial entertainment not only isn't creative, it actuallydestroys the audience's ability to appreciate and participate in thecreative process. The implications become apparent when werealize that, as leisure time increases, each human will be forced tobecome a creative, self-sufficient, empirical energy laboratory.D. H. Lawrence has written: "The business of art is to reveal therelation between man and his circumambient universe at this livingmoment. As mankind is always struggling in the toil of oldrelationships, art is always ahead of its 'times,' which themselves arealways far in the rear of the living present." Jean-Jacques Lebelstated the same idea in different terms when he described art as "thecreation of a new world, never seen before, imperceptibly gaining onreality."
We've seen that man is conditioned by, and reacts to, certainstimuli in the man-made environment. The commercial entertainer isa manipulator of these stimuli. If he employs a certain triggermechanism, we're guaranteed to react accordingly, like puppets,providing he manipulates the trigger properly. I'm not saying theartist doesn't resort to audience manipulation; we know he oftendoes. The point, however, is the motivation in doing so. If the artistmust resort to trigger mechanisms to make himself clear, he will; butit's only a means to his end. In the case of the commercialentertainer, however, it's the end in itself.Plot, story, and what commonly is known as "drama" are thedevices that enable the commercial entertainer to manipulate hisaudience. The very act of this manipulation, gratifying conditionedneeds, is what the films actually are about. The viewer purchases itwith his ticket and is understandably annoyed if the film asks him tomanipulate himself, to engage in the creative process along with theartist. Our word poetry derives from the Greek root poiein meaning"to make" or "to work." The viewer of commercial entertainmentcinema does not want to work; he wants to be an object, to be actedupon, to be manipulated. The true subject of commercialentertainment is this little game it plays with its audience.By perpetuating a destructive habit of unthinking response toformulas, by forcing us to rely ever more frequently on memory, thecommercial entertainer encourages an unthinking response to dailylife, inhibiting self-awareness. Driven by the profit motive, thecommercial entertainer dares not risk alienating us by attemptingnew language even if he were capable of it. He seeks only to gratifypreconditioned needs for formula stimulus. He offers nothing wehaven't already conceived, nothing we don't already expect. Artexplains; entertainment exploits. Art is freedom from the conditionsof memory; entertainment is conditional on a present that isconditioned by the past. Entertainment gives us what we want; artgives us what we don't know we want. To confront a work of art is toconfront oneself—but aspects of oneself previously unrecognized.The extent to which blatant audience manipulation not only istolerated but extolled is alarming. Alfred Hitchcock, for example, inhis interview with François Truffaut, finds merit in his ability tomanipulate preconditioned needs for formula stimulus. Speaking of
Psycho, Hitchcock frankly admits: "It wasn't a message that stirred them, nor was it a great performance, or their enjoyment of thenovel... they were aroused by the construction of the story, and theway in which it was told caused audiences all over the world to reactand become emotional.''21 It is essential to understand that Hitchcock openly admits that hedidn't even try to expand awareness or to communicate somesignificant message, but only exploited a universal tradition ofdramatic manipulation in order to supply his audience with thegratification it paid for. The audience sees itself and its dreamsreflected in the film and reacts according to memory, whichKrishnamurti has characterized as being always conditioned."Memory," says Krishnamurti, "is always in the past and is given lifein the present by a challenge. Memory has no life in itself; it comesto life in the challenge [preconditioned formula stimulus]. And allmemory, whether dormant or active, is conditioned."22 It is thisprocess that the entertainment industry calls audience identification.To a healthy mind, anything that is primarily art is also immenselyentertaining. It seems obvious that the most important things shouldbe the most entertaining. Where there's a difference between whatwe "like" and what we know to be vital, we have a condition ofschizophrenia, an unnatural and destructive situation. I speakdeliberately of a "healthy" mind as one capable of creative thinking.Filmmaker Ken Kelman: "The old cinema removes experience,making us see things along with (or through) a protagonist withwhom we identify, and a plot in which we are caught. Such anapproach tends toward not only a lack of viewpoint, of definition of
whose experience it is, but also filters the power of sight into merehabit, dissolves insight into vicariousness. The spectator is reducedto a voyeur—which is, increasingly, the individual's role in society atlarge."23 Minimalist painter David Lee: "When people do not trust theirsenses they lack confidence in themselves. For the last fewcenturies people have lacked confidence. They have not trusted their experience to provide a standard for knowing how to act." 24 It isquite obvious that most of us not only don't know much about art, wedon't even know what we like. Krishnamurti: "One of the fundamentalcauses of the disintegration of society is copying, which is theworship of authority."25 Imitation is the result of inadequate information. Information resultsin change. Change requires energy. Energy is the result of adequateinformation Energy is directly proportional to the amount ofinformation about the structure of a system. Norbert Wiener: "Information is a name for the content of what is exchanged with theouter world as we adjust to it and make our adjustment felt upon it …to live effectively is to live with adequate information."26 From thecinema we receive conceptual information (ideas) and designinformation (experiences). In concert they become one phenomenon, which I've described as the experiential information of aestheticconceptual design. This information is either useful (additive) or redundant. Useful information accelerates change. Redundant information restricts change. If sustained long enough redundant information finally becomes misinformation, which results in negativechange.In communication theory and the laws of thermodynamics thequantity called entropy is the amount of energy reversiblyexchanged from one system in the universe to another. Entropy alsois the measure of disorder within those systems. It measures thelack of information about the structure of the system. For ourpurposes "structure of the system" should be taken to mean "thehuman condition," the universal subject of aesthetic activity. Entropyshould be understood as the degree of our ignorance about thatcondition. Ignorance always increases when a system's messagesare redundant. Ignorance is not a state of limbo in which noinformation exists, but rather a state of increasing chaos due to
misinformation about the structure of the system.The First Law of Thermodynamics states that energy is constant: itcannot be created or destroyed; its form can change, but not its quantity.
The Second Law states that the amount of energy within a localsystem is naturally entropic—it tends toward disorder, dissipation,incoherence. And since energy is defined as "a capacity to rearrange elemental order," entropy, which runs counter to thatcapacity, means less potential for change. We've learned fromphysics that the only anti-entropic force in the universe, or what iscalled negentropy (negative entropy), results from the process offeedback. Feedback exists between systems that are not closed butrather open and contingent upon other systems. In the strictestsense there are no truly "closed" systems anywhere in the universe;all processes impinge upon and are affected by other processes insome way. However, for most practical purposes, it is enough to saythat a system is "closed" when entropy dominates the feedbackprocess, that is, when the measure of energy lost is greater than themeasure of energy gained.The phenomenon of man, or of biological life on earth taken as aprocess, is negentropic because its subsystems feed energy backinto one another and thus are self-enriching, regenerative. Thusenergy is wealth, and wealth according to Buckminster Fuller is "thenumber of forward days a given system is sustainable." BiologistJohn Bleibtreu arrived at a similar conclusion when he noted that theconcept of time can best be viewed as a function of the Second Lawof Thermodynamics—that the measure of entropy in a system is ameasure of its age, or the passage of time since the systemoriginated.27 In other words the degree of a system's entropy isequal to redundancy or stasis whereas its negentropy is equal tokinesis or change. So information becomes energy when itcontributes to the self-enriching omni-regenerative wealth of thesystem. When it's not contributing (i.e., redundant) it is allowing thenatural entropy to increase."It is possible to treat sets of messages as having an entropy likesets of states of the external world... in fact, it is possible to interpretthe information carried by a message as essentially the negative ofits entropy... that is, the more probable the message the lessinformation it gives. Clichés, for example, are less illuminating thangreat poems." 28 Thus the more information concerning the human condition that the artist is able to give us, the more energy we havewith which to modify ourselves and grow in accord with theaccelerating accelerations of the living present.Commercial entertainment may be considered a closed systemsince entropy dominates the feedback process. To satisfy the profitmotive the commercial entertainer must give the audience what itexpects, which is conditional on what it has been getting, which isconditional on what it previously received, ad infinitum. Inherent inthe term "genre," which applies to all entertainment, is that it must beprobable. The content of westerns, gangster movies, romances, etc.,is probable in that it can be identified and comprehended simply byclassification. The phenomenon of drama itself usually is notconsidered a genre, but is in fact the most universal and archetypicalof all genres. Drama, by definition, means conflict, which in turnmeans suspense. Suspense is requisite on the expectation of knownalternatives. One cannot expect the unknown. Thereforeexpectation, suspense, and drama are all redundant probablequalities and thus are noninformative.Drama requires a plot that forces the viewer to move from point Ato point B to point C along predetermined lines. Plot does not mean"story" (beginning-middle-end). It simply indicates a relatively closedstructure in which free association and conscious participation arerestricted. Since the viewer remains passive and is acted upon bythe experience rather than participating in it with volition, there's nofeedback, that vital source of negentropy. Norbert Wiener:"Feedback is a method of controlling a system by reinserting into itthe results of its past performance... if the information whichproceeds backward from the performance is able to change thegeneral method and pattern of performance, we have a processwhich may well be called learning."29 Fuller: "Every time man makesa new experiment he always learns more. He cannot learn less.”30 In the cinema, feedback is possible almost exclusively in what I callthe synaesthetic mode, which we'll discuss presently. Because it isentirely personal it rests on no identifiable plot and is not probable.The viewer is forced to create along with the film, to interpret forhimself what he is experiencing. If the information (either concept or design) reveals some previously unrecognized aspect of the viewer'srelation to the circumambient universe—or provides language withwhich to conceptualize old realities more effectively— the viewerrecreates that discovery along with the artist, thus feeding back intothe environment the existence of more creative potential, which mayin turn be used by the artist for messages of still greater eloquenceand perception. If the information is redundant, as it must be incommercial entertainment, nothing is learned and change becomesunlikely. The noted authority on communication theory, J. R. Pierce,has demonstrated that an increase in entropy means a decrease inthe ability to change. 31 And we have seen that the ability to changeis the most urgent need facing twentieth-century man.The notion of experimental art, therefore, is meaningless. All art isexperimental or it isn't art. Art is research, whereas entertainment isa game or conflict. We have learned from cybernetics that inresearch one's work is governed by one's strongest points, whereasin conflicts or games one's work is governed by its weakestmoments. We have defined the difference between art and entertainment in scientific terms and have found entertainment to beinherently entropic, opposed to change, and art to be inherentlynegentropic, a catalyst to change. The artist is always an anarchist,a revolutionary, a creator of new worlds imperceptibly gaining onreality. He can do this because we live in a cosmos in which there'salways something more to be seen. When finally we erase thedifference between art and entertainment—as we must to survive—we shall find that our community is no longer a community, and weshall begin to understand radical evolution.
 The image I would offer as representative of the PaleocyberneticAge is that of the dying man whose life passes before him: a Retrospective Man who discovers the truth about himself too late to makeuse of it. The information explosion is not a window on the future somuch as a mirror of the past catching up with the present. Theintermedia network, or global communications grid, taps knowledgeresources that always have existed in discrete social enclavesaround the planet and saturates them into the collective consciousness. Suddenly the mass public "discovers" African culture,East Indian and American Indian cultures, folk music, politics.Knowledge previously the domain of scholars becomes commonknowledge, and precisely at that point when the old order is about tofade it sees itself clearly for the first time. William Burroughs hascalled it the Age of Total Confront, noting that all the heretoforeinvisible aspects of our condition have quite suddenly becomevisible.Through Duchamp, Cage, and Warhol, for example, we haverediscovered art in the ancient Platonic sense in which there's nodifference between the aesthetic and the mundane. Although thesemen certainly fulfill an avant-garde function in present society, theyin fact conform to the most universal and enduring definition of art. Ifthey've been rejected as artists by the majority of our citizens it'sbecause we've been conditioned by an economic system in whichaesthetic concerns must assume a secondary position if the systemis to survive. Thus art is separated from common experience and anelite hierarchy is established, which seems only natural to everyonecaught up in the economic struggle. John Dewey: "When art attainsclassic status it becomes isolated from the human conditions underwhich it was brought into being and from the human consequences itengenders in actual life experience... when, because of their remoteness, the objects acknowledged by the cultivated to be works offine art seem anemic to the mass of people, aesthetic hunger islikely to seek the cheap and the vulgar."32 Twentieth-century man is retrospective also because the symbolic and value content of his messages—most of which take the form ofcommercial entertainment—is predominantly redundant. NorbertWiener: "Society can only be understood through a study of themessages and the communication facilities which belong to it."33 Almost without exception, these messages tend to be concernedwith what is known as the "human condition." The history of popularentertainment, in terms of its conceptual content, can be divided intothree general categories: (1) idealization, which corresponds tostates of happiness in which life is seen as a heavenly experienceand man is characterized by his most noble deeds; (2)frustration, anexpression of the conflict between inner and outer realities, whenwhat is is not what should be; (3) demoralization, generallyexpressed as "the blues." In commercial entertainment cinema thesethree formulas are followed religiously, almost without exception, andusually comprise the nature of the message. They are the humancondition, that which is taken for granted, the given, the facts of life.Everyone has ideals, everyone is frustrated, everyone gets theblues. But this information is redundant; we must go on from there.Commercial entertainment is "popular" and not what we call artbecause it doesn't go on from there. To insure the widest possibleacceptance of his message, the commercial entertainer must speaka common language. He copies, repeats, or imitates that whichalready exists within the grasp of the so-called average man. Andthe majority of us embrace it because it offers security, a crutch, inthe knowledge that the miseries we suffer are shared by others. Butart transcends the human condition. The artist doesn't want to hearour problems and our dreams—he already knows them. Instead hewants to know what we're doing about them, and he gives us theinstruments we need for the task. The symbol is the basic instrumentof thought; those who create new symbols—artists, scientists, poets,philosophers—are those who, by giving us new instruments to thinkwith, give us new areas to explore in our thinking.A rather indignant woman once asked me how I could have thenerve to suggest that an "abstract" film like Brakhage's Dog Star
Man could be more important than an immortal classic like Renoir's  like Renoir's do not contain one single insight into the nature of thehuman condition that has not already been absorbed by the collective consciousness. Bob Dylan: "How many times must a man lookup before he can see the sky? How many ears must one man havebefore he can hear people cry?" And my own question: how manytimes must we acknowledge the human condition before it becomesredundant? How long must we tolerate the same facts of life beforewe begin seeking new facts? We intuit that the human condition hasexpanded since yesterday, but the popular arts aren't telling us. Thehuman condition does not stop with what we know about ourselves.Each genuinely new experience expands the definition of the humancondition that much more. Some are seeking those new facts, thosenew experiences, through the synaesthetic research of expandedcinema.Barbara Rose: "The new art... posits an entirely new world viewwhich shifts cultural values from a death-oriented, commemorative,past-enshrining culture to a life-oriented, present-oriented civilization... In this sense [Claes] Oldenburg's monuments represent, as hecontended, not the appearance of something, but its disappearance... the tomb, the memorial, the shrine, the monument, all belongto cultures that commemorate."34 John McHale: "The problem now is that those areas of our formaleducation which deal with the symbolic and value content of ourculture do so almost entirely in terms of the past35 ... The neweducational technologies are largely being used as twentieth-centurychannels to convey a conceptual context which is still nineteenthcentury or earlier. The most recent example was mathematics,where the Sputnik-inspired 'second look' revealed that mathematicsas generally taught was quite out of date. Science has begun to takea second look at its contents as currently taught. But the arts andhumanities remain relatively unaware of any need to revise theconceptual framework of studies little removed from the politeeducation of eighteenth-century gentry."
 The entropy of commercial entertainment is the chaos that resultsfrom its retrospective nature, forever commemorating past events,historical figures, social eras, life-styles, or the memory of the viewer,while the living present speeds farther from our grasp. Alvin Toffler:"We offer children courses in history; why not also make a course in'future' a prerequisite for every student? A course in which thepossibilities and probabilities of the future are systematically explored exactly as we now explore the social system of the Romansor the rise of the feudal manor?
Our discussion obviously has excluded many important works of artthat function completely within the genres of drama, plot, and story.
Citizen Kane, L'Avventura, Pierrot le Fou, and 8½ are dramatic, plotfilms, yet no one denies their greatness. We know also that most ofthe truly significant films such as Beauty and the Beast or Pather
Panchali operate entirely within parameters of the human conditionas generally recognized. Moreover, common sense tells us that theartist must work with what exists, with the given, the humancondition; he could produce no art at all if he relied exclusively oninformation that is totally new.Yet the undeniable aesthetic value of these works does notcontradict what I have said about art and entertainment. These filmstranscend their genres. They are not important for their plots orstories but rather for their design. Susan Sontag: "If there is any'knowledge' to be gained through art, it is the experience of the formor style of knowing the subject, rather than a knowledge of thesubject itself."38 To perceive that the artist functions as design scientist we mustfirst understand that in their broadest implications art and scienceare the same. Eddington's classic definition of science, "The earnestattempt to set in order the facts of experience," corresponds withBronowski's view of science as "The organization of knowledge insuch a way that it commands more of the hidden potential innature…all science is the search for unity in hidden likenesses."39 It'sthe same in art: to set in order the facts of experience is to reveal therelation between man and his circumambient universe with all itshidden potential.Herbert Read: "Only in so far as the artist establishes symbols forthe representation of reality can mind, as a structure of thought, takeshape. The artist establishes these symbols by becoming conscious of new aspects of reality and by representing his consciousness inplastic or poetic form... it follows that any extension ofawareness ofreality, any groping beyond the threshold of present knowledge,must first establish its sensuous imagery." 40Our word "design" is composed of "de" and "sign," indicating that itmeans "to remove the symbol of." In this context "symbol" signifiesideas distinct from experiences. As design scientist the artistdiscovers and perfects language that corresponds more directly toexperience; he develops hardware that embodies its own softwareas a conceptual tool for coping with reality. He separates the imagefrom its official symbolic meaning and reveals its hidden potential, itsprocess, its actual reality, the experience of the thing. (A. N.Whitehead: "Process and existence pre-suppose each other.") Heestablishes certain parameters that define a discrete "special case"phenomenon, principle, or concept known as the subject. The work,in effect, poses this "problem" of perception and we as viewers mustdraw from this special case all the "general case" metaphysicalrelationships that are encoded within the language of the piece.This language is the experiential information of aestheticconceptual design; it is addressed to what Wittgenstein termed the"inarticulate conscious," the domain between the subconscious andthe conscious that can't be expressed in words but of which weconstantly are aware. The artist does not point out new facts somuch as he creates a new language of conceptual design information with which we arrive at a new and more completeunderstanding of old facts, thus expanding our control over theinterior and exterior environments.The auteur theory of personal cinema indicates those instanceswhen the filmmaker's design science transcends the parameters ofhis genre; our comprehension of that genre, that human condition isthus expanded. But cybernetics has demonstrated that the structureof a system is an index of the performance which may be expectedfrom it.41 That is, the conceptual design of a movie determines thevariety and amount of information we're likely to obtain from it. Andsince we've seen that the amount of information is directly proportional to the degree of available choices we can seethat drama, story, and plot, which restrict choice, also restrict information. So the auteur is limited to developing new designs for oldinformation, which we all know can be immensely enjoyable andinstructive. There are no "new" ideas in L'Avventura, for example,but Antonioni voiced the inarticulate conscious of an entiregeneration through the conceptual and structural integrity of histranscendental design science, merging sense and symbol, form andcontent.Rudolph Arnheim: "Perceiving achieves at the sensory level whatin the realm of reasoning is known as understanding... eyesight isinsight."42 If we realize that insight means to see intuitively, weacknowledge that Arnheim's assertion is true only when ordinaryvision—conditioned and enculturated by the most vulgar of environments—is liberated through aesthetic conceptual design information. Film is a way of seeing. We see through the filmmaker's eyes.If he's an artist we become artists along with him. If he's not,information tends toward misinformation.The artist's intuitive sense of proportion corresponds to thephenomenon of absolute pitch in musicians and answers a fundamental need in comprehending what we apprehend. In the finalanalysis our aptitudes and our psychological balance are a result ofour relation to images. The image precedes the idea in the development of consciousness: an infant doesn't think "green" when itlooks at a blade of grass. It follows that the more "beautiful" theimage the more beautiful our consciousness.The design of commercial entertainment is neither a science noran art; it answers only to the common taste, the accepted vision, forfear of disturbing the viewer's reaction to the formula. The viewer'staste is conditioned by a profit-motivated architecture, which hasforgotten that a house is a machine to live in, a service environment.He leaves the theatre after three hours of redundancy and returnshome to a symbol, not a natural environment in which beauty andfunctionality are one. Little wonder that praise is heaped on filmswhose imagery is on the level of calendar art. Global man stands onthe moon casually regarding the entire spaceship earth in a glance, yet humanity still is impressed that a rich Hollywood studio can lugits Panavision cameras over the Alps and come back with prettypictures. "Surpassing visual majesty!" gasp the critics over A Man
and a Woman or Dr. Zhivago. But with today's technology andunlimited wealth who couldn't compile a picturesque movie? In factit's a disgrace when a film is not of surpassing visual majesty because there's a lot of that in our world. The new cinema, however,takes us to another world entirely. John Cage: "Where beauty endsis where the artist begins."
"The final poem will be the poem of fact in the language of fact. But it will be the poem
of fact not realized before." WALLACE STEVENSExpanded cinema has been expanding for a long time. Since it leftthe underground and became a popular avant-garde form in the late1950's the new cinema primarily has been an exercise in technique,the gradual development of a truly cinematic language with which toexpand further man's communicative powers and thus his awareness. If expanded cinema has had anything to say, the message hasbeen the medium.1 Slavko Vorkapich: "Most of the films made so farare examples not of creative use of motion-picture devices andtechniques, but of their use as recording instruments only. There areextremely few motion pictures that may be cited as instances ofcreative use of the medium, and from these only fragments and shortpassages may be compared to the best achievements in the otherarts."2 It has taken more than seventy years for global man to come toterms with the cinematic medium, to liberate it from theatre andliterature. We had to wait until our consciousness caught up with ourtechnology. But although the new cinema is the first and only truecinematic language, it still is used as a recording instrument. Therecorded subject, however, is not the objective external human condition but the filmmaker's consciousness, his perception and its process. If we've tolerated a certain absence of discipline, it has been infavor of a freedom through which new language hopefully would bedeveloped. With a fusion of aesthetic sensibilities and technologicalinnovation that language finally has been achieved. The new cinemahas emerged as the only aesthetic language to match theenvironment in which we live.Emerging with it is a major paradigm: a conception of the nature ofcinema so encompassing and persuasive that it promises todominate all image-making in much the same way as the theory ofgeneral relativity dominates all physics today. I call it synaesthetic
cinema. In relation to traditional cinema it's like the science of bionicsin relation to previous notions of biology and chemistry: that is, itmodels itself after the patterns of nature rather than attempting to"explain" or conform nature in terms of its own structure. The newartist, like the new scientist, does not "wrest order our of chaos."Both realize that supreme order lies in nature and traditionally wehave only made chaos out of it. The new artist and the new scientistrecognize that chaos is order on another level, and they set about tofind the rules of structuring by which nature has achieved it. That'swhy the scientist has abandoned absolutes and the filmmaker hasabandoned montage.Herbert Read: "Art never has been an attempt to grasp reality as awhole—that is beyond our human capacity; it was never even anattempt to represent the totality of appearances; but rather it hasbeen the piecemeal recognition and patient fixation of what is significant in human experience."3 We're beginning to understand that"what is significant in human experience” for contemporary man isthe awareness of consciousness, the recognition of the process ofperception. (I define perception both as "sensation" and "conceptualization," the process of forming concepts, usually classified as"cognition." Because we're enculturated, to perceive is to interpret.)Through synaesthetic cinema man attempts to express a total phenomenon—his own consciousness.
Synaesthetic cinema is the only aesthetic language suited to thepost-industrial, post-literate, man-made environment with its multidimensional simulsensory network of information sources. It's theonly aesthetic tool that even approaches the reality continuum ofconscious existence in the nonuniform, nonlinear, nonconnectedelectronic atmosphere of the Paleocybernetic Age. "As visual spaceis superseded," McLuhan observes, "we discover that there is nocontinuity or connectedness, let alone depth and perspective, in anyof the other senses. The modern artist—in music, in painting, inpoetry—has been patiently expounding this fact for decades."5 Themodern synaesthetic filmmaker has been patiently expounding thisfact for decades as well, and with far more success than painters orpoets.Finally, I propose to show that synaesthetic cinema transcends therestrictions of drama, story, and plot and therefore cannot be called agenre. In addition to matching McLuhan's view of contemporaryexistence, it also corresponds to Buckminster Fuller's observationson natural synergetics and consequently is negentropic. Beforediscussing specifics, however, we must first understand why synaesthetic cinema is just now being developed into a universallanguage, more than seventy years after the birth of the medium.Like most everything else, it's because of television.
Just as every fact is also metaphysical, every piece of hardwareimplies software: information about its existence. Television is thesoftware of the earth. Television is invisible. It's not an object. It's nota piece of furniture. The television set is irrelevant to the phenomenon of television. The videosphere is the noosphere transformed into a perceivable state. "Television," says video artist LesLevine, "is the most obvious realization of software in the generalenvironment. It shows the human race itself as a working model ofitself. It renders the social and psychological condition of the environment visible to the environment."A culture is dead when its myths have been exposed. Television isexposing the myths of the republic. Television reveals the observed,the observer, the process of observing. There can be no secrets inthe Paleocybernetic Age. On the macrostructural level all televisionis a closed circuit that constantly turns us back upon ourselves.Humanity extends its video Third Eye to the moon and feeds its ownimage back into its monitors. "Monitor" is the electronic manifestationof superego. Television is the earth's superego. We become awareof our individual behavior by observing the collective behavior asmanifested in the global videosphere. We identify with persons innews events as once we identified with actors or events in fictionfilms. Before television we saw little of the human condition. Now wesee and hear it daily. The world's not a stage, it's a TV documentary.Television extends global man throughout the ecological biospheretwenty-four hours a day. By moving into outer space, televisionreveals new dimensions of inner space, new aspects of man'sperception and the results of that perception.This implosive, self-revealing, consciousness-expanding process isirreversible. Global information is the natural enemy of local government, for it reveals the true context in which that government is operating. Global television is directly responsible for the politicalturmoil that is increasing around the world today. The politicalestablishments sense this and are beginning to react. But it's toolate. Television makes it impossible for governments to maintain theillusion of sovereignty and separatism which is essential for theirexistence. Television is one of the most revolutionary tools in theentire spectrum of technoanarchy.We recognize television's negative effect on the popular arts: that itinduces a kind of sedentary uniformity of expression and generates afalse sense of creativity. In its broader consequences, however,television releases cinema from the umbilical of theatre andliterature. It renders cinema obsolete as communicator of the objective human condition. It has affected cinema in much the same wayas the invention of photography affected sculpture and painting.Cubism and other means of abstracting the realistic image were bornwith the photographic plate because painting no longer provided themost realistic images. The plastic arts abandoned exterior reality forinterior reality. The same has happened to cinema as a result oftelevision: movies no longer provide the most realistic images sothey've turned inward.We're in direct contact with the human condition; there's no longerany need to represent it through art. Not only does this releasecinema; it virtually forces cinema to move beyond the objectivehuman condition into newer extra-objective territory. There aremanifold trends that indicate that virtually all cinema has felt theprofound impact of television and is moving inevitably towardsynaesthesis. The progression naturally includes intermediary stepsfirst toward greater "realism," then cinéma-vérité, before the final andtotal abandon of the notion of reality itself. The fact that we're nowapproaching the peak of the realism stage is demonstrated byWarhol, for example, whose recent work contrasts "reality" with"realism" as manifested in the spontaneous behavior of actors pretending to be acting. In addition there's virtually all of Godard's work,as well as John Cassavetes' Faces, James McBride's David
Holzman's Diary, Peter Watkins' The War Game, Gillo Pontecorvo's
The Battle of Algiers, Paul Morrissey's Flesh, and Stanton Kaye's
Georg and Brandy in the Wilderness.
Most of this work is characterized by an astute blending of scriptedand directed acting with spontaneous improvisation, in which theactor randomly fills in the parameters of a characterization predetermined and predestined by the director. Yet precisely becausethey attempt to approximate objective reality without actually beingreal, places them firmly in the tradition of conventional Hollywoodpretend movies, with the exception of camera presence or whatmight be called process-level perception.It's only natural that contemporary filmmakers should be moresuccessful at imitating reality since the intermedia network makes usmore familiar with it. But there's a curious and quite significantaspect to the nature of this new realism: by incorporating a kind ofbastardized cinéma-vérité or newsreel style of photography andbehavior, the filmmaker has not moved closer to actual unstylizedreality itself but rather a reality prestylized to approximate ourprimary mode of knowing natural events: television. We accept it asbeing more realistic because it more closely resembles the processlevel perception of TV watching, in which unstylized reality is filteredand shaped through the process of a given medium.The traditional dramatic structure of these films becomes moreeasily discernible in contrast with pure cinéma-vérité work such asJean Rouch's Chronicle of a Summer, Pennebaker's Don't Look
Back, or Chris Marker's brilliant Le Joli Mai. A comparison of Facesor David Holzman's Diary with Warhol's Nude Restaurant is evenmore revealing: the difference between prestylized and predestinedrealities on the one hand, and Warhol's totally random and onlypartially prestylized reality on the other, is brought into sharp focus.Warhol has expressed regret that a camera cannot simply beswitched on and left running for twenty-four hours, since the "important" (naturally-revealing) events seem to occur at that momentjust after it stops turning. Godard disclosed similar sentiments whenhe said: "The ideal for me is to obtain right away what will work. Ifretakes are necessary it falls short of the mark. The immediate ischance. At the same time it is definitive. What I want is the definitiveby chance."
Simultaneous Perception of Harmonic Opposites Time, said St. Augustine, is a threefold present: the present as weexperience it; the past as present memory; the future as presentexpectation. Hopi Indians, who thought of themselves as caretakersof the planet, used only the present tense in their language: past wasindicated as "present manifested," and the future was signified by"present manifesting.”6 Until approximately 800 B.C., few culturesthought in terms of past or future: all experience was synthesized inthe present. It seems that practically everyone but contemporaryman has intuitively understood the space-time continuum.Synaesthetic cinema is a space-time continuum. It is neither subjective, objective, nor nonobjective, but rather all of these combined:that is to say, extra-objective. Synaesthetic and psychedelic meanapproximately the same thing. Synaesthesis is the harmony ofdifferent or opposing impulses produced by a work of art. It meansthe simultaneous perception of harmonic opposites. Its sensorialeffect is known as synaesthesia, and it's as old as the ancientGreeks who coined the term. Under the influence of mindmanifesting hallucinogens one experiences synaesthesia in additionto what Dr. John Lilly calls "white noise," or random signals in thecontrol mechanism of the human bio-computer.7 Any dualism is composed of harmonic opposites: in/out, up/ down,off/on, yes/no, black/white, good/bad. Past aesthetic traditions,reflecting the consciousness of their period, have tended toconcentrate on one element at a time. But the Paleocyberneticexperience doesn't support that kind of logic. The emphasis of traditional logic might be expressed in terms of an either/or choice, whichin physics is known as bistable logic. But the logic of the CyberneticAge into which we're moving will be both/and, which in physics is called triadic logic. Physicists have found they can no longer describe phenomena with the binary yes/no formula but must operatewith yes/no/maybe.The accumulation of facts is no longer of top priority to humanity.The problem now is to apply existing facts to new conceptual wholes,new vistas of reality. By "reality" we mean relationships. PietMondrian: "As nature becomes more abstract, a relation is moreclearly felt. The new painting has clearly shown this. And that is whyit has come to the point of expressing nothing but relations."8 Synaesthetic cinema is an art of relations: the relations of the conceptual information and design information within the film itselfgraphically, and the relation between the film and the viewer at thatpoint where human perception (sensation and conceptualization)brings them together. As science gropes for new models to accommodate apparent inconsistencies and contradictions, the need forseeing incompatibles together is more easily discerned. For example, the phenomenon of light is conceived in both/and terms: bothcontinuous wave motions and discontinuous particles. And we havenoted our incapacity for observing both movement and position ofelectrons.This is but one of many reasons that synaestheticcinema is theonly aesthetic language suited to contemporary life. It can function asa conditioning force to unite us with the living present, not separateus from it. My use of the term synaesthetic is meant only as a way ofunderstanding the historical significance of a phenomenon withouthistorical precedent. Actually the most descriptive term for the newcinema is "personal" because it's only an extension of the filmmaker's central nervous system. The reader should not interpret"synaesthetic" as an attempt to categorize or label a phenomenonthat has no definition. There's no single film that could be calledtypical of the new cinema because it is defined anew by each individual filmmaker.I've selected about seven films that are particularly representativeof the various points I wish to make. I'm using them only to illuminatethe nature of synaesthetic cinema in general, not as specific archetypal examples. Sufficient literature exists on Brakhage's Dog Star
Man to preclude any major expository analysis here, but it is exemplary of virtually all concepts involved in the synaesthetic mode, inparticular syncretism and metamorphosis. Will Hindle's Chinese
Firedrill is an outstanding example of the evocative language ofsynaesthetic cinema as distinct from the expositional mode ofnarrative cinema. Pat O'Neill's 7362, John Schofill's XFilm, andRonald Nameth's Exploding Plastic Inevitable provide some insightinto kinaesthetics and kinetic empathy. Carolee Schneemann's
Fuses, in contrast with Warhol's Blue Movie and Paul Morrissey's
Flesh, illustrates the new polymorphous eroticism. And, finally,Michael Snow's Wavelength has been chosen for its qualities ofextra-objective constructivism.
Montage as Collage The harmonic opposites of synaesthetic cinema are apprehendedthrough syncretistic vision, which Anton Ehrenzweig has characterized as: "The child's capacity to comprehend a total structure ratherthan analyzing single elements... he does not differentiate the identityof a shape by watching its details one by one, but goes straight forthe whole."9 Syncretism is the combination of many different formsinto one whole form. Persian tapestries and tile domes aresyncretistic. Mandalas are syncretistic. Nature is syncre-tistic. Themajority of filmgoers, conditioned by a lifetime of conven-tionalnarrative cinema, make little sense of synaesthetic cinema becausetheir natural syncretistic faculty has suffered entropy and atrophy.Buckminster Fuller: "All universities have been progressivelyorganized for ever-finer specialization. Society assumes that specialization is natural, inevitable and desirable. Yet in observing a littlechild we find it is interested in everything and spontaneously apprehends, comprehends and coordinates an ever-expanding inventory of experience.''10 It has been demonstrated that all species of life on earth that havebecome extinct were doomed through overspecialization, whetheranatomical, biological, or geological. Therefore conventional narrative cinema, in which the filmmaker plays policeman guiding oureyes here and there in the picture plane, might be described as"specialized vision," which tends to decay our ability to comprehendthe more complex and diffuse visual field of living reality.The general impression that syncretism, and therefore synaestheticcinema, is empty of detail or content is an illusion: "… it is highlysensitive to the smallest of cues and proves more efficient in identifying individual objects. It impresses us as empty, vague and generalized only because the narrowly-focused surface consciousnesscannot grasp its wider more comprehensive structure. Its precise,concrete content has become inaccessible and ‘unconscious.’11 ''Synaesthetic cinema provides access to syncretistic contentthrough the inarticulate conscious. Similarly, it contradicts theteachings of Gestalt psychology, according to which we must makean either/or choice: we can choose either to see the "significant"figure or the "insignificant" ground. But when the "content" of themessage is the relationship between its parts, and when structureand content are synonymous, all elements are equally significant.Ehrenzweig has suggested that syncretism is "Gestalt-free perception," and indeed this must be the case if one expects any visual"meaning" from synaesthetic cinema.Paul Klee, whose syncretistic paintings closely resemble certainworks of synaesthetic cinema, spoke of the endotopic (inside) and
exotopic (outside) areas of a picture plane, stressing their equalimportance in the overall experience.12 Synaesthetic cinema, primarily through superimposition, fuses the endotopic and exotopic byreducing depth-of-field to a total field of nonfocused multiplicity.Moreover, it subsumes the conventional sense of time by interconnecting and interpenetrating the temporal dimension with images thatexist outside of time. The "action" of Dog Star Man, for example,could be an entire life-span or merely a split second in the inarticulate conscious of Stan Brakhage. I stress "action" as commonlyunderstood in the cinema because synaesthetic syncretism replacesmontage with collage and, as André Bazin has observed, "montageis the dramatic analysis of action." Bazin was perceptive enough torealize that "only an increased realism of the image can support theabstraction of montage.''13 Synaesthetic cinema subsumes Eisenstein's theory of montage-ascollision and Pudovkin's view of montage-as-linkage. It demonstratesthat they were certainly correct but didn't follow their own observations to their logical conclusions. They were restricted by the consciousness of their times. Synaesthetic cinema transcends the notionof reality. It doesn't "chop the world into little fragments," an effectBazin attributed to montage, because it's not concerned with theobjective world in the first place. The new filmmaker is showing ushis feelings. Montage is indeed an abstraction of objective reality;that's why, until recently, Warhol did not cut his films at all. Butsynaesthetic syncretism is the only mode in which the manifestationsof one's consciousness can be approximated without distortion.There's no conflict in harmonic opposites. Nor is there anything thatmight be called linkage. There is only a space-time continuum, amosaic simultaneity. Although composed of discrete elements it isconceived and edited as one continuous perceptual experience. Asynaesthetic film is, in effect, one image continually transforming intoother images: metamorphosis. It is the one unifying force in all ofsynaesthetic cinema. The notion of universal unity and cosmicsimultaneity is a logical result of the psychological effects of theglobal communications network.If montage is the dramatic analysis of action, a film without classicmontage thus avoids at least the structural element of dramainherent within the medium. All that remains to avoid drama entirelyis to exclude dramatic (i.e., theatrical) content by making content andstructure the same. Warhol's films are not dramatic, and neither arefilms at the extreme opposite end of the spectrum, synaesthesia. Theclassical tension of montage is dissolved through overlappingsuperimposition. For example: we have shots A, B. and C. First wesee A, then B is superimposed over it to produce AB. Then A fadesas C fades in. There's a brief transitional period in which we'reseeing ABC simultaneously, and finally we're looking only at BC. Butno sooner has this evolved than B begins to fade as D appears, andso on.This is a physical, structural equivalent of the Hopi "presentmanifested" and "present manifesting" space-time continuum. It's theonly style of cinema that directly corresponds to the theory of generalrelativity, a concept that has completely transformed all aspects ofcontemporary existence except traditional Hollywood cinema. Theeffects of metamorphosis described above become more apparent ifshots A, B. and C happen to be of the same image but from slightly different perspectives, or with varied inflections of tone and color. Itis through this process that a synaesthetic film becomes, in effect,one image constantly manifesting.And finally we're forced to admit that the pure art of cinema existsalmost exclusively in the use of superimposition. In traditionalcinema, superimposition usually gives the impression of two moviesoccurring at once in the same frame with their attendant psychological and physiological connotations coexisting separately. In synaesthetic cinema they are one total image in metamorphosis. This doesnot imply that we must relinquish what Eisenstein called "intellectualmontage." In fact, the conflict-juxtaposition of intellectual effects isincreased when they occur within the same image. Fiction, legend,parable, myth, traditionally have been employed to make comprehensible the paradoxes of that field of nonfocused multiplicity that islife. Synaesthetic cinema, whose very structure is paradox, makesparadox a language in itself, discovering the order (legend) hiddenwithin it.
Stan Brakhage: Dog Star Man
Dog Star Man is a silent, seventy-eight-minute film divided into
Prelude and Parts One through Four. It was shot in 1959-60 andedited during the next four years. Prelude is an extremely fastcollage of multiple-level superimpositions and compounded imagesthat emerge from a blurry diaphanous haze and slowly take form,only to be obscured by other images and countermotions. We beginto discern specific objects, patterns, and finally a motif or theme: theelements of Earth, Air, Fire, and Water; a childbirth; a man climbinga mountain with his dog; the moon; the sun throwing off huge solarprominences; lovemaking; photomicrography of blood vessels; abeating heart; a forest; clouds; the faces of a man and a woman; andliterally thousands of other images to appear in the rest of the film.These images exist essentially autonomously and are superimposed or compounded not for "dramatic" effect but rather as a kind ofmatrix for psychic exercise on the part of the viewers. For example,over an expanding solar prominence we might see Brakhage'sleonine face or a line of snow-covered fir trees in the mountains ofColorado. We are not asked to interpret or find "meaning" in these combinations, though vastly rich experiences arepossible. When theimages emerge from a hazy blur, for example, we are not asked tointerpret this as the creation of life or some similar dramatic notion,but rather as a perceptual experience for its own sake, in addition tothe contextual relationship of this image to the rest of the film, orwhat Eisenstein indicated by the term "intellectual montage."Whereas Prelude is a rapid barrage of multiple overlays, Part Oneis superimposed sparingly, concentrating on interface relationshipsbetween individual shots. However, every effort is made to subdueany effect that might be considered montage. The shots fade in andout very slowly, often fading into a color such as red or green. Thefragments of Prelude fall into place and an overwhelming sense ofoceanic consciousness evolves. We begin to realize that Brakhageis attempting to express the totality of consciousness, the realitycontinuum of the living present. As his solitary figure climbs thesnow-covered mountain, we see images of man's world from themicrospectrum of the bloodstream to the macrospectrum of the sun,moon, and universe. Both time and space are subsumed in thewholeness of the experience. Superimposition is not used as aneconomical substitute for "parallel montage"—indicating simultaneous but spatially separate events—for spatio-temporal dimensionsdo not exist in the consciousness. Brakhage is merely presenting uswith images orchestrated in such a way that a new reality arises outof them.When we see the sun superimposed over a lovemaking scene, it'snot an invitation to interpret a meaning such as cosmic regenerationor the smallness of man in the universe, but rather as an occasion toexperience our own involuntary and inarticulate associations. Theimages are not symbolic, as in The Seventh Seal, or artfully composed as in Last Year at Marienbad. Brakhage does not manipulateus emotionally, saying: "Now I want you to feel suspense" or "Now Iwant you to laugh" or "Now is the time to be fearful." This is the ployof the commercial entertainer: an arrogant degradation of cinema,using film as a tool for cheap sensationalism. This is not to say thatspatio-temporal experiences, or suspense, humor, or any emotioncannot be found in synaesthetic cinema. Quite the contrary: becausewe're dealing with our own personal associations, emotion is guaranteed. And it will be more genuinely profound than the formulatriggered gratification of conditioned response that we receive fromcommercial entertainment.Brakhage has spoken of "restructuring" vision through his films,and often refers to the "untutored" vision of the child before he'staught to think and see in symbols. In what he calls "closed-eyevision," Brakhage attempts to simulate, by painting and scratching onfilm, the flashes and patterns of color we perceive when our eyes areclosed. Approximately midway through Dog Star Man, otherwisemundane images take on wholly new meanings and in some casesnew appearances. We stop mentally labeling images and concentrate instead on the synaesthetic/kinaesthetic flow of color,shape, and motion.This is not to suggest a nonobjective experience. The imagesdevelop their own syntactical meaning and a "narrative" line isperceived, though the meaning of any given image may change inthe context of different sequences. This constitutes a creative use ofthe language itself, over and above any particular "content" conveyed by that language. (Wallace Stevens: "A new meaning isequivalent to a new word.") The effect of synaesthetic cinema is tobreak the hold that the medium has over us, to make us perceive itobjectively. Art is utter folly unless it frees us from the need of art asan experience separate from the ordinary.Wittgenstein has described art as a game whose rules are madeup as the game is in process. The exact meaning of words (images)becomes known only in the context of each new statement.14 E. H.Gombrich, on the other hand, demonstrates that objective realismalso is a game, but one whose schema is established prior to its useand is never altered. Artists and society thus learn to read theschema as though it were objective reality. But since the languageitself is not used creatively, the viewer is seduced beyond form intoan abstract content with an illusion of being externally objective.15 Thus the viewer is captive under the hold, or spell, of the mediumand is not free to analyze the process of experience.
14 Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations (Oxford: Blackwell Press, 1963).
Brakhage expressed this concept with respect to his own work:"Imagine an eye unruled by man-made laws of perspective, an eyeunprejudiced by compositional logic, an eye which must know eachobject encountered in life through a new adventure of perception.Imagine a world alive with incomprehensible objects and shimmeringwith an endless variety of movement and gradations of color.Imagine a world before the beginning was the word.''16
16 Stan Brakhage, "Metaphors on Vision," ed. P. Adams Sitney, Film Culture (Fall, 1963).
Evocation and Exposition:
Toward Oceanic Consciousness There is an important distinction to be made betweenevocation, thelanguage of synaesthetic cinema, primarily poetic in structure andeffect, and exposition, the language of narrative cinema, whichchiefly conforms to traditional, literary narrative modes. Intermediaartist and filmmaker Carolee Schneemann has characterized evocation as the place between desire and experience, the interpenetrations and displacements which occur between various sense stimuli."Vision is not a fact," Miss Schneemann postulates, "but anaggregate of sensations. Vision creates its own efforts towardrealization; effort does not create vision.”17 Thus, by creating a new kind of vision, synaesthetic cinema createsa new kind of consciousness: oceanic consciousness. Freud spokeof oceanic consciousness as that in which we feel our individualexistence lost in mystic union with the universe. Nothing could bemore appropriate to contemporary experience, when for the first timeman has left the boundaries of this globe. The oceanic effect ofsynaesthetic cinema is similar to the mystical allure of the naturalelements: we stare in mindless wonder at the ocean or a lake orriver. We are drawn almost hypnotically to fire, gazing as thoughspellbound. We see cathedrals in clouds, not thinking anything inparticular but feeling somehow secure and content. It is similar to theconcept of no-mindedness in Zen, which also is the state of mantraand mandala consciousness, the widest range of consciousness.Miss Schneemann defines perception as eye-journey or empathydrawing. It is precisely through a kind of empathy-drawing that thecontent of synaesthetic cinema is created jointly by the film and theviewer. The very nature of evocation requires creative effort on thepart of the viewer, whereas expository modes do all the work and theviewer becomes passive. In expositional narrative, a story is being figure of Stan Brakhage in Dog Star Man actually moves through apsychic environment created by the viewer, whose deeply-hiddencreative resources and hungers have been evoked by the film.With typical poetic eloquence, Hermann Hesse has summarizedthe evocative effects of oceanic consciousness in this memorablepassage from Demian: "The surrender to nature's irrational, strangelyconfused formations produces in us a feeling of inner harmony withthe force responsible for these phenomena... the boundaries separating us from nature begin to quiver and dissolve... we are unable todecide whether the images on our retina are the result ofimpressions coming from without or from within... we discover towhat extent we are creative, to what extent oursoul partakes of theconstant creation of the world.'
Will Hindle: Chinese FiredrillThere have been essentially three generations of personal filmmakers in the United States. The first began with the invention of themedium and continued in various stages through the 1940's. Thesecond began approximately in the mid-1950's with the increasingavailability of inexpensive 8mm. and 16mm. equipment. It represented the first popular movement toward personal cinema as a wayof life. The third generation has evolved since the mid-1960's, primarily in the San Francisco area, where the latest trend is toward ablending of aesthetics and technology. One reason personal cinemais more eloquent than commercial cinema is that the filmmaker isforced into a closer interaction with his technology.Will Hindle is exemplary of this recent technological awareness, acombination of engineering and aesthetics. Trained in art, literature,and professional television filmmaking, Hindle has applied hisknowledge to personal cinema in a singularly spectacular fashion.His ability to invest a technical device with emotional or metaphysical content is truly impressive. He has, for example, developedthe technique of rear-projection rephotography to a high degree ofeloquence. He shoots original scenes with wide-angle lenses, then"crops" them by projecting and rephotographing this footage using aspecial single-frame projector. Thus extremely subtle effects are achieved that would be prohibitively expensive, if not impossible, ifdone through conventional laboratory optical printing.Although many synaesthetic films are wonderfully evocative,Hindle's recent works are especially notable for their ability to generate overwhelming emotional impact almost exclusively from cine matic technique, not thematic content. Hindle has an uncanny talentfor transforming spontaneous unstylized reality into unearthly poeticvisions, as in Billabong (1968), a wordless impressionistic "documentary" about a boy's camp in northern California, and Watersmith (1969), a spectacular visual fantasy created from footage of anOlympic swimming team at practice.
Chinese Firedrill, unique in Hindle's work, was prestylized and"performed" almost in the traditional sense of a scripted, directed,and acted movie. The difference is that Hindle used the images notfor their symbolic or theatrical content but as ingredients of an almosticonographic nature, to be compounded and manipulated through theprocess of the medium. Although there are "actors" (Hindle plays theprincipal role), there is no characterization. Although there are sets,we're not asked to suspend our disbelief.
Chinese Firedrill is a romantic, nostalgic film. Yet its nostalgia is ofthe unknown, of vague emotions, haunted dreams, unspoken words,silences between sounds. It's a nostalgia for the oceanic presentrather than a remembered past. It is total fantasy; yet like the bestfantasies—8½, Beauty and the Beast, The Children of Paradise— itseems more real than the coldest documentary. The "action" occursentirely within the mind of the protagonist, who never leaves thesmall room in which he lives. It's all rooms everywhere, all cubicleswherever we find man trapped within his dreams. Through thedoor/mirror is the beyond, the unreachable, the unattainable, thebeginning and the end. Not once in the film's twenty minutes can wepinpoint a sequence or action that might be called "dramatic" in theusual sense. Yet almost immediately an overwhelming atmosphereof pathos is generated. There are moments of excruciating emotionalimpact, not from audience manipulation but from Hindle's ability torealize metaphysical substance, stirring the inarticulate conscious.Every effort is made to distance the viewer, to keep us aware of ourperceptions, to emphasize the purely cinematic as opposed to thetheatrical.
 We find Hindle kneeling on the floor of his surrealistic room stuffingthousands of IBM cards into boxes. Over this we hear a strangemonologue of fragmented words and sentences in an odd foreignaccent. This is punctuated by fierce thunderclaps and howling windthat evolve into ethereal music and tinkling bell sounds. Periodicallythe screen is slashed across with blinding white flashes while thecentral images constantly are transformed through lap-dissolves andmultiple superimpositions. There are flash-forwards of images to beencountered later, though we don't recognize them and thereforedon't interpret them. We see nude lovers, a small boy bathing, abeautiful woman with candles, a huge eyeball, a battery of glaringlights. These are noted for their inherent psychological connotationsand not as narrative devices.The most memorable sequence of Firedrill, possibly one of thegreat scenes in the history of film, involves Hindle lying in anguish onhis floor and slowly reaching out with one hand toward theglimmering void beyond his door. Suddenly a mirror-like reflection ofhis arm and hand appears on the opposite side of the mirror. Whenhe removes his hand we see the vague shadowy figure of a nudewoman silhouetted ghostlike, her skin sparkling. In slow motion thesilhouette of a nude man enters from an opposite direction and thetwo gossamer figures embrace in a weightless ballet of gracefulmotion in some dream of bliss. In the film's final image, the hauntedman has become a child once again, splashing in his bath in a seriesof freeze-frames that grow ever fainter until they vanish.
Synaesthetics and Kinaesthetics:
The Way of All Experience The term kinetic generally indicates motion of material bodies andthe forces and energies associated with it. Thus to isolate a certaintype of film as kinetic and therefore different from other films meanswe're talking more about forces and energies than about matter. Idefine aesthetic quite simply as: the manner of experiencing something. Kinaesthetic, therefore, is the manner of experiencing a thingthrough the forces and energies associated with its motion. This iscalled kinaesthesia, the experience of sensory perception. One whois keenly aware of kinetic qualities is said to possess a kinaestheticsense.The fundamental subject of synaesthetic cinema—forces andenergies—cannot be photographed. It's not what we're seeing somuch as the process and effect of seeing: that is, the phenomenon ofexperience itself, which exists only in the viewer. Synaestheticcinema abandons traditional narrative because events in reality donot move in linear fashion. It abandons common notions of "style"because there is no style in nature. It is concerned less with factsthan with metaphysics, and there is no fact that is not also metaphysical. One cannot photograph metaphysical forces. One cannoteven “represent" them. One can, however, actuallyevoke them in theinarticulate conscious of the viewer.The dynamic interaction of formal proportions in kinaestheticcinema evokes cognition in the inarticulate conscious, which I call kinetic empathy. In perceiving kinetic activity the mind's eye makesits empathy-drawing, translating the graphics into emotionalpsychological equivalents meaningful to the viewer, albeit meaningof an inarticulate nature. "Articulation" of this experience occurs inthe perception of it and is wholly nonverbal. It makes us aware offundamental realities beneath the surface of normal perception:forces and energies.
