‘‘In the bubble’’ is a phrase used by air traffic controllers to describe their state of mind, among their glowing screens and flows of information, when they are in the flow and in control. Lucky them. Most of us feel far from in control. We’re filling up the world with amazing devices and systems—on top of the natural and human ones that were already here— only to discover that these complex systems seem to be out of control: too complex to understand, let alone to shape, or redirect. Things may seem out of control—but they are not out of our hands. Many of the troubling situations in our world are the result of design decisions. Too many of them were bad design decisions, it is true—but we are not the victims of blind chance. The parlous condition of the planet, our only home, is a good example. Eighty percent of the environmental impact of the products, services, and infrastructures around us is determined at the design stage. Design decisions shape the processes behind the products we use, the materials and energy required to make them, the ways we operate them on a daily basis, and what happens to them when we no longer need them. We may not have meant to do so, and we may regret the way things have turned out, but we designed our way into the situations that face us today. The premise of this book is simply stated: If we can design our way into difficulty, we can design our way out. ‘‘Everyone designs,’’ wrote scientist Herb Simon, ‘‘who devises courses of action aimed at changing existing situations, into preferred ones.’’ For Victor Papanek, too, ‘‘design is basic to all human activities—the placing and patterning of any act towards a desired goal constitutes a design process.’’ Designing is what human beings do.
Two questions follow this understanding of design. First, where do we want to be? What exactly are the ‘‘preferred situations’’ or ‘‘desired goals’’ that Simon and Papanek talk about? Second, how do we get there? What courses of action will take us from here to there? Although this book addresses those two questions, it is not about the future, and it is not really about the new. I have organized the chapters that follow around ten themes that deal with daily life as it is lived now—not around fantastical science fiction futures. And I will tell you about aspects of daily life in which radical innovation is already emerging: Nothing you read here is a promise or a fantasy that may, one day, come true. One of the things that drove me to write this book was boredom with the schlock of the new. Many of the ‘‘preferred situations’’ that Simon talked about already exist—but in a different and often unexpected context. One of the things you can do next Monday morning, after reading this book, is walk out of your door and take a look around. I am confident you will be surprised by the variety of social innovation taking place in your environment. I have been. That said, addressing the question ‘‘Where do we want to be?’’ brings us up against an innovation dilemma. We’ve built a technology-focused society that is remarkable on means, but hazy about ends. It’s no longer clear to which question all this stuff—tech—is an answer, or what value it adds to our lives. Too many people I meet assume that being innovative means ‘‘adding technology to it.’’ Technology has become a powerful, self-replicating system that is accustomed to respect and receives the lion’s share of research funding. In NASDAQ, tech even has its own stock exchange.
I do not suggest that we have fallen out of love with technology, more that we are regaining appreciation and respect for what people can do that tech can’t. Throughout the modern age we have subordinated the interests of people to those of technology, an approach that has led to the unthinking destruction of traditional cultures and the undermining of forms of life that we judged, once, to be backward. The victims of this approach to modernization have not just been hapless people in rain forests. ‘‘Getting people to adapt’’ to new technology has affected us all. We believed that the assembly line and standardization would make the world a better place, yet along with efficiency came a dehumanization of work. We act no less as slaves to the machine today when we lambaste teachers as ‘‘obstacles to progress’’ when they do not embrace the latest technological fix for education.6 The introduction of a new mass technology—telegraph, railway, electrifi- cation, radio, telephone, television, automobiles, air travel—has always been accompanied by a spectacular package of promises. A certain naı¨vete´ is excusable for the inventors of those early technologies: They had no way of knowing about the unforeseen consequences of their innovations. Today, we don’t have that alibi. We know that new technologies have unexpected consequences.7 The worst kind of tech push combines irresponsibility with wishful thinking. One of the worst current offenders is biotech. When Eugene Thacker (no relation) studied the biotech industry for a book he was writing, he encountered ‘‘blatant disparity between hyper-optimism and an overall lack of concrete results.’’ The future promises of biotech are many and far reaching, but Thacker could not help noticing the comparative absence of any concrete, widespread, sustainable results of the application of biotech in medicine and health care. We are victims, says Thacker, of ‘‘biotech imagineering’’ by vested interests that participate in the assemblage of enticing future visions.
Being skeptical about technology does not mean rejecting it. There’s a lot of technology in this book. For one thing, we don’t have an either/or choice: Terra firma, and terabits, are both here to stay. Broadband, smart materials, wearables, pervasive computing, connected appliances, and other stuff we don’t know about yet will continue to transform the ways we live. The question is, how? Means and ends have lived apart too long in discussions of innovation. Understanding why things change—and reflecting on how they should change—are not separate issues. In the pages that follow, I try to reframe issues of technology and innovation in ways that make it easier for nonspecialists to engage in meaningful dialogue—as things happen. Theodor Zeldin calls this the transition from an age of specifications to one of deliberation.10 We cannot stop tech, and there’s no reason why we should. It’s useful. But we need to change the innovation agenda in such a way that people come before tech. It will be an ongoing struggle, of course. From nineteenth-century mill owners to twentieth-century dot-commers, businesspeople have looked for ways to remove people from production, using technology and automation to do so. A lot of organizations will continue on this path, but they’re behind the times. This book is about a world in which well-being is based on less stuff and more people. It describes an approach to innovation in which people are designed back into situations. In these situations, we will no longer be persuaded that to be better off, we must consume more trashy products and devices. The following pages describe the transition, which is already under way, from innovation driven by science fiction to innovation inspired by social fiction. I’ve collected the best examples I could find of designed services and situations in which people carry out familiar, daily-life activities in new ways: moving around, learning, caring for each other, playing, working. Some of these services involve the use of products, or equipment, to carry them out. This equipment ranges from body implants to wide-bodied jets. But objects, as a rule, play a supporting role. New principles—above all, lightness—inform the ways they are designed, made, used, and looked after. The design focus is overwhelmingly on services and systems, not on things.
One issue we need time to reflect on concerns the sheer number of people we have in the world. The planet’s population has doubled in my generation’s lifetime—something that never happened to a generation before. You and I are the first human beings who have had to adjust to such an explosion of numbers. And yet we persist in the pursuit of ‘‘laborsaving’’ devices and services—using tech as the means. It’s not that we’re dumb. On the contrary, many millions of people have exerted great intelligence and creativity in building the modern world. It’s more that we’re being swept into unknown and dangerous waters by accelerating economic growth. On just one single day of the days I have spent writing this book, as much world trade was carried out as in the whole of 1949; as much scientific research was published as in the whole of 1960; as many telephone calls were made as in all of 1983; as many e-mails were sent as in 1990. Our natural, human, and industrial systems, which evolve slowly, are struggling to adapt. Laws and institutions that we might expect to regulate these flows have not been able to keep up. A good example is what is inaccurately described as mindless sprawl in our physical environment. We deplore the relentless spread of low-density suburbs over millions of acres of formerly virgin land. We worry about its environmental impact, about the obesity in people that it fosters, and about the other social problems that come in its wake. But nobody seems to have designed urban sprawl, it just happens—or so it appears. On closer inspection, however, urban sprawl is not mindless at all. There is nothing inevitable about its development. Sprawl is the result of zoning laws designed by legislators, low-density buildings designed by developers, marketing strategies designed by ad agencies, tax breaks designed by economists, credit lines designed by banks, geomatics designed by retailers, data-mining software designed by hamburger chains, and automobiles designed by car designers. The interactions between all these systems and human behavior are complicated and hard to understand—but the policies themselves are not the result of chance. ‘‘Out of control’’ is an ideology, not a fact.
To do things differently, we need to perceive things differently. In discussing where we want to be, breakthrough ideas often come when people look at the world through a fresh lens. One of the most important design challenges I pose in this book is to make the processes and systems that surround us intelligible and knowable. We need to design macroscopes, as well as microscopes, to help us understand where things come from and why: the life story of a hamburger, or time pressure, or urban sprawl. Equipped with a fresh understanding of why our present situations are as they are, we can better describe where we want to be. With alternative situations evocatively in mind, we can design our way from here to there. Macroscopes can help us understand complex systems, but our own eyes, unaided, are just as important. All over the world, alternative models of organizing daily life are being tried and tested right now. We just need to look for them. When Ezio Manzini ran design workshops in Brazil, China, and India to develop new design ideas for an exhibition about daily life, he encountered dozens of examples of new services for daily life he had never thought of before—and also new attitudes. In many different cultures, he discovered, ‘‘an obsession with things is being replaced by a fascination with events.’’ Both young and old people are designing activities and environments in which energy and material consumption is modest and more people are used, not fewer, in the ways we take care of people, work, study, move around, find food, eat, and share equipment. In a less-stuff-more-people world, we still need systems, platforms, and services that enable people to interact more effectively and enjoyably. These platforms and infrastructures will require some technology and a lot of design. Some services will help us share the load of everyday activities: washing clothes on the roof of apartment blocks, looking after children, communal kitchens and gardens, communal workshops for maintenance activities, tool and equipment sharing, networks and clubs for health care and prevention. The most important potential impact of wireless communications, for example, will be on the resource ecologies of cities. Connecting people, resources, and places to each other in new combinations, on a real-time basis, delivers demand-responsive services that, when combined with location awareness and dynamic resource allocation, have the potential to reduce drastically the amount of hardware—from gadgets to buildings—that we need to function effectively.
There are many things wrong with design in our world, but designers, as a group of people, are not the problem. Thirty years ago, in Design for the Real World, Victor Papanek observed that ‘‘there are professions more harmful than industrial design—but only a few.’’ This kind of blaming and shaming is counterproductive and unjustified. The world contains its share of selfish and incurious designers, of course. But no designer that I ever met set out to wreck the planet, force us to eat fast food, or make life miserable. Our dilemma is that small design actions can have big effects—often unexpectedly—and designers have only recently been told, with the rest of us, how incredibly sensitive we need to be to the possible consequences of any design steps we take. Another reason not to blame designers for our ills is that many of them are working hard, right now, to fix them. They are designing new services and systems that are radically less environmentally damaging, and more socially responsible, than the ones we have now. This book contains many examples of their often-inspiring work. But the challenges and opportunities that face us will not be solved by designers acting on our behalf. On the contrary: As we suffuse the world with complex technical systems—on top of the natural and social systems already here—old-style top-down, outside-in design simply won’t work. The days of the celebrity solo designer are over. Complex systems are shaped by all the people who use them, and in this new era of collaborative innovation, designers are having to evolve from being the individual authors of objects, or buildings, to being the facilitators of change among large groups of people. Sensitivity to context, to relationships, and to consequence.
The chicken breast packets in my supermarket in Amsterdam bear a photograph of the Swedish farmer who rears the birds. He is leaning on the wooden fence of an attractive-looking farm. Behind him are blue sky and green trees. The label recounts a little story about the town where the farmer lives. Before you ask: No, they don’t show a picture of the exchicken itself—but I’m nonetheless intrigued. What’s going on here— why am I being provided with this background information? It’s a packet of chicken, not a package holiday. My questions contain their own answer. The farmer’s locality has become as much a product as the chicken’s leg. The legs of dead chickens look and taste pretty much the same, and it’s a challenge to make each one look attractive and different. Human beings and places, on the other hand, are different from one another. Associate your product with nice people, and a nice place, and it should do well. My chicken-in-a-context is an example of how the focus of both business and social innovation is shifting from locomotion—sourcing things in poor places and shipping them to rich ones—to locality. Authenticity, local context, and local production are increasingly desirable attributes in the things we buy and the services we use. Local sells, and for that reason is a powerful antidote to mobility expansion. But design to enhance locality is easier said than done. Localities contain a lot of nature, for example, and nature is the result of millions of years of iterative, trial-and-error design. Biologists describe as choronomic the influence on a process of its specific context. Choronomy adds value, but often in ways we do not yet understand. Janine Benyus counsels humility in the face of how little we know about even small natural locations.
Social contexts, too, are more complicated the closer you look. The kind of design that focuses on the shape of buildings or that draws thick lines across maps with a felt-tip pen, reconfiguring whole neighborhoods at a stroke, is not well-suited for local situations. The lesson is that design for locality is not about a return to simplicity; it involves dealing with more complexity, not less. Locality matters not just as a place to sell things, but as a medium of innovation. Social contexts, for example, determine the ease with which new ideas, trends, and social behavior spread through populations. ‘‘Once you understand that context matters,’’ writes Malcolm Gladwell, ‘‘you realize that specific and relatively small elements in the environment can serve as Tipping Points.’’ Disregard for context is one of the main reasons, for me, why the new economy failed. Dot-commers promoted ‘‘anytime, anywhere’’ over and above the here and now—and we didn’t buy it. As I explained in chapter , globalization brought with it numerous assertions that economic power is less and less rooted in a place. Distance is dead, geography is obsolete, the pundits declared. They argued that sophisticated distribution and logistics systems, computer-integrated manufacturing and design, and direct marketing have changed what it means to design, produce, distribute, or sell a product or service. Investor pressure to reduce costs, more or less regardless of the consequences, increased pressure on companies to move production around constantly in search of low-cost materials and cheap labor. As the distance between the producers of products or services and their users grew as a result, activities that used to be centralized downtown were steadily dispersed. Two geographers, Stephen Graham and Simon Marvin, described this phenomenon as ‘‘splintering urbanism.’’ Many cities, persuaded that they were now in competition with one another, embraced the concept of marketing. Some started to think of themselves as brands. At first, many were persuaded that snappy communications were the key to success; these places spent lavishly on logos, slogans, and corporate identities. Many of these campaigns were banal— ‘‘Glasgow’s Miles Better,’’ ‘‘EuroLille,’’ and the like—but advertising and design consultants did good business peddling these surface treatments, which persist to this day.
The trouble is that place marketers are not alone in missing this point. Cultural producers, too, are stuck in a point-to-mass mindset. I attended a meeting in Amsterdam on the subject of ‘‘hosting.’’ The invitation posed an interesting question: ‘‘What is the relationship between art biennales and their host cities?’’ Many international art power brokers turned up for this meeting, which was hosted by an organization called Manifesta. At the meeting, the curators and critics and producers seemed to be most interested in ‘‘viewers’’ and ‘‘audiences’’ and ‘‘publics.’’ It dawned on me, as I listened to the art world’s heavy hitters in action, that art has become most attractive to the interests it once ridiculed. The tourism industry loves art because its events and museums are ‘‘attractions.’’ Property developers love art because a bijou gallery lends allure to egregious projects. For city marketers, an art biennale bestows an aura of intelligence on a city. Planners are bewitched by the idea that if they can only lure the ‘‘creative class’’ to their city, their place will become more glamorous. ‘‘Our events are not summer camps,’’ pleaded Franco Bonami, director of the Venice Biennale. Bonami invited more than five hundred artists to that year’s event. But he did not mention one single word about what, if anything, these five hundred people had to say—or why the rest of us should care. After two hours I had to leave. ‘‘Hosting’’ felt like a sales meeting for Saga Holidays. So then I went to Japan where Prada, which at the time was said to be 1.5 billion euros in debt, had lavished 87 million dollars on a new Herzog and de Meuron–designed store in Tokyo. ‘‘Shopping,’’ a public relations person gushed in the press, ‘‘is the fundamental purpose of cities today.’’ In a busy Tokyo street the new store’s Plexiglas exterior, which is like bubble wrap, certainly stood out—and so it should, for that much more. A creative consultant named Christopher Everard told The Economist that ‘‘by using iconic architects, the label is building brand equity.’’ (Everard’s firm is called InterLife Consultancy. I e-mailed him the suggestion that he change its name to ‘‘Get A Life Consultancy’’—but he has not replied.) For me the Prada project smelled like the last days of Rome.
This is not to deny that the economic case for the creative industries is strong. After all, designing spectacles is big business, and tourism is a huge one. One trade fair and exhibition, called Exp, announced itself as ‘‘The Event That Defines the Experience Industry.’’ For bewildered first-time visitors, Exp conveniently divided its global industry into four domains: corporate visitor centers, retail, casinos, and museums. Exp promised to show visitors ‘‘how to gain a greater share of your guest’s discretionary time and disposable income’’; how to ‘‘destroy the myth that great experience need [sic] huge budgets’’; and ‘‘how to surf the generational shift.’’ The website for the exhibition did not mention a session on how to speak English, but so-called experience designers (in Europe, they tend to be called ‘‘interaction designers’’), undeterred, flocked to Exp. In some places, sport is replacing culture as an attractor in urban regeneration. Paris, in its bid for the 2012 Olympics, says the role that investment in sports infrastructures plays in the Games of the twenty-first century will be ‘‘comparable to that played by industrialisation at the end of the 19th century.’’ Claude Be´be´ar, chairman of the Paris Olympic Committee, does not think of sport as kicking a ball around a field. He thinks about twentymillion-dollar sponsorships and about the well-being of those who provide the spectacle. His plans for a sporty Paris, celebrated in a lavish and immense book, feature a boulevard dedicated to sport, bordered with hotels to lodge journalists, an international media center, a superdome, and the Olympic pool. Private road lanes, of the kind Stalin pioneered in Moscow, and a travel time of twelve minutes from bed to track are promised for athletes and officials. If the bed-to-track journey proves too taxing, an electronic games and Internet center will be provided to ‘‘help athletes relax and get in touch with the outside world.
It is not a question of good building, and bad. A beautiful place may never bring about an explosion of life, while a haphazard hall may be a tremendous meeting place. This is the mystery of the theatre, but in the understanding of this mystery lies the one science. It is not a matter of saying analytically, what are the requirements, how best they could be organized—this will usually bring into existence a tame, conventional, often cold hall. The science of theatre building must come from studying what it is that brings about the more vivid relationships between people.15 Many people in theater question whether new buildings are needed at all. Big theaters, in particular, tend to sap energy out of productions and money out of producers. Some producers have taken literally to the streets in so-called promenade and site-specific theater. In Chaucer-like journeys, players and audience move together around cities, through forests, up mountains, or into resonant but abandoned spaces. In the age of the rave, street-level events are everywhere: festivals, concerts, corporate events, church pageants, and fashion shows vie with each other to occupy the streets. In Europe, where theater people are leading the way to a sane policy for space planning, the term ‘‘territorial capital’’ is now being used to describe the ‘‘hard’’ and ‘‘soft’’ assets of a region. Hard assets include natural beauty and features; shopping facilities; cultural attractions; and buildings, museums, monuments, and the like. Soft assets are all about people and culture: skills, traditions, festivals, events and occasions, situations, settings, social ties, civic loyalty, memories, and the capacity to facilitate learning of various kinds. Turning the notion of territorial capital into a policy or a design program is a challenging task. EU countries are committed formally to the worthy ambition to enable a ‘‘European knowledge economy’’ by the year 2010. The problem is that these countries understand what the knowledge economy means in different ways.
The answer lies in webs, chains, and networks of cities and regions. By aggregating their hard and soft assets, collective cities—multicentered cities—can match the array of functions and resources of the metropolitan centers while still (in theory) delivering superior social quality. The ability of small cities to offer a context that supports intimacy and encounter— what the French call la vie associative—is where small-city webs will win out over the big centers. Multicity networks are not a new idea. They date back to the thirteenth century when, in the Hansa League, more than seventy merchant cities collaborated for their common good in order to control exports and imports over a wide swath of Europe. A powerful network of trading partners, with its own accounting system and shared vocabulary, the Hansa League became one of the major economic forces of the Middle Ages. At one stage it controlled much of Scandinavia, the Baltic states, northern Germany, and Poland—and outposts can be found even today as far away as Scotland and the Basque Country.18 Hanze Expo, the League’s modern incarnation, links the Baltic Rim—St. Petersburg, Tallinn, Riga, Rostock—to northern Germany and Holland. One part of this link, Estonia, has pronounced itself to be the Hong Kong of the Baltic.
For networked, multicentered localities to succeed, different kinds of territorial and social capital need to be linked by a combination of physical and informational networks. This integration of hard and soft factors is complex. For one thing, planners and policymakers have been joined by a variety of new players in a game they used to play on their own. Privatized network industries, such as railway companies, airports, electricity suppliers, and telecommunications operators, all want a say in planning discussions. So, too, do citizens. With growing confidence and sophistication, citizen groups are demanding that social agendas—such as social inclusion or environmental sustainability—be factored into planning processes. A nonprofit technology organization called The Open Planning Project (TOPP) argues that information about public places is as important a public good as the physical places themselves. TOPP advocates a free, distributed, and open geographic information infrastructure and is developing new ways to enhance the ability of all citizens to engage in meaningful dialogue about their environment. One of TOPP’s projects, a collaborative weblog called DigitalEarth.org, is conceived as a shared public online space for talking about the environmental information infrastructure. The site includes technology and tools to help citizens deploy geographic data, environmental models, and visualizations.21 The spread of open planning is a profound challenge to planning and design professionals. They are torn between the increasing complexity of the systems they have to deal with and the demand that people be put first.
The Regionmaker as one way to help designers of cities and regions cope with the new demands. ‘‘We keep getting asked to make ‘visions’ for cities and regions,’’ Winy Maas, a principal of the firm, told me, ‘‘but we want to base these on real data, not just our imagination.’’ The design challenge, for Maas, is to represent complex data about regions and cities visually, in order to provide a space in which the different actors now involved can explore options together. The Regionmaker, developed by MVRDV initially for a project called RhineRuhrCity, orchestrates a variety of existing information sources and flows—demographic data or outputs from geographical information systems (GIS) (or geomatics, as they are also called). The Regionmaker supports maps, study charts, and access to databases; imports and exports images and video feeds from helicopters or satellites; connects to the Internet; and uses computer-aided design (CAD) drawings. Maas and his colleagues plan to add to the system information on the movement of people, goods, and information. A housing subroutine will develop scenarios for optimal housing designs. A calculator will optimize natural light in built spaces. A function mixer will propose optimal mixtures of activities according to economic, social, or cultural criteria. The long-term aim is for the system to become a decision support environment in a more proactive and critical sense. ‘‘We could add an Evaluator, or an Evolver that can suggest criticism of the input we make,’’ speculates Maas. Deciding who gets to use these new tools is itself a design action. The principle of open planning is that nonspecialized actors and stakeholders are involved in the creation process, not simply as yes-no responders to precooked proposals. MVRDV’s system has the potential to enable municipalities, citizen groups, and planners to ‘‘compose’’ an optimized mixed neighborhood—but they have to be invited to do so and shown how. All of this takes commitment and time.
