This book is about machines for writing and reading in late-nineteenth-century America. Its purpose is to explore writing and reading as culturally and historically contingent experiences and, at the same time, to broaden the current widely held view of technology in its relation to textuality. The main character in this narrative is the phonograph, invented by Thomas Edison in 1877. That I make the phonograph my protagonist plays upon the gist of my argument: isolating and centering machines in this way, to essentialize them as the phonograph or the computer, is misleading and denies their history. Edison identified his phonograph as a textual device, primarily for taking dictarion. With this mandate, the invention emerged from Edison's laboratory into and amid a cluster of mutually defining literacy practices, texts, and technologies, among them shorthand reporting, typescripts, printing telegraphs, and silent motion pictures. Even Edison's own famous light bulb, now a universal icon for "I have an idea," had to make sense within an ambient climate of textual and other representational practices, a climate it would, in fact, have an ample share in modifying.
This shift from Gutenberg to hypertext has been greeted with celebration by some, sackcloth and ashes by others, while the emotional tenor of response tends to deflect attention away from questions about shifting per se. The most schematic accounts simply jump from the logic of print in the sixteenth century to a new logic for digital communications in the twenty-first, as if five hundred years had not happened, or as if Caxton and Carlyle, Paine and Pound, could have experienced textuality in the same way. Even the more extended narratives of George Landow, David lay Bolter, and Richard Lanham, so rich in detail about the new world order, elide crucial developments toward the end of the nineteenth century that together prefigure most of the "revolutionary" aspects of digital, hypertextual networks. The pending ubiquity of multimedia, of paperless offices and personalized newspapers, as well as the supposed democratization of information and liberating proliferation of "virtual" identities were also imagined in association with predigital technology. Here, I seek to interject a corrective portion of the missing detail; this work's grounding contention is that these same accounts generally distort the character and contexts of literacy and textuality in modern life. In particular, they fail to explore technology as plural, decentered, indeterminate, as the reciprocal product of textual practices, rather than just a causal agent of change. My focus is on experiments and innovations in the area of inscription. In the manner of German theorist Friedrich Kittler, I see mechanized inscription as integral (though certainly not unique) to the climate of representation that emerged toward the end of the nineteenth century and has dominated the twentieth. Its features are quickly mapped: Edison stumbled across the idea of mechanically inscribed sound during his work improving Alexander Graham Bell's telephone. He jotted hastily in his experimental notebook, "Theres no doubt that I shall be able to store up & reproduce automatically at any future time the human voice perfectly."
His single, jumbled sentence identifies the fundamental properties of inscribed communication that distinguish it from communication generally. Telephones reproduce speech at a distance, but phonographs both reproduce and conserve, able to reproduce again and again "at any future time," because of the delicate spirals inscribed on the surface of records. The same parameters of economy and durability that characterize "storing up" sound for later mechanical reproduction helped animate such contemporary phenomena as the tensile bureaucracy of managerial capital, the ideal of objectivity in the professions and media, and the success of new popular culture forms. Economy and durability informed new modes of inscriptive duplication, such as the office mimeograph, which allowed bureaucrats to have their copy and send one too. Likewise, economy and durability characterized considerations of photography and then motion pictures, which stored up sights and movements. Incidents as fleeting as the pulsations of the heart and activities as evanescent as the private use of electrical current were captured, registered, metered, and read in new mechanical ways. Some of these inscriptions were more transparent as representations than others; some were more textual, some more graphic. Many, like the grooved surfaces of phonograph records, provoked explicit questions about textuality, about how some inscriptions might or might not be like texts. Inscription is a"form of intervention, into" which new machinery continues to interpose. Ink is imposed on paper, while pens and keyboards intrude into the posture of hands. Grooves are incised into phonograph records, while sound echoes in our ears. The genealogies ofinscription allow what anthropologist Michael Taussig calls "particular" histories of the senses, as different media and varied forms, genres, and styles of representation act as brokers among accultured practices of seeing, hearing, speaking, and writing. There is what Jonathan Goldberg calls a "history of technology that is also the history of 'man,' the programmed/programming machine: the human written". This is the kind of history that Scripts, Grooves, and Writing Machines seeks to locate.
My discussion offers a less determined, less determinist version of technology, in part by locating writing machines and other textual devices in the instances of invention, in narratives that show each machine, device, or process to have been authored and appropriated out of many different possibilities relevant to the making of meaning. I begin with the idea that inventing new ways to write or new kinds of writing presupposes a model of what writing and reading are and can be. If the model is too eccentric, then the invention may not work, or the model might suit some relevant social groups and not others. If the model is negotiable within or against existing models, then the invention has a chance of appropriation and dissemination. In this way, shorthand alphabets, phonographs, typewriters, and other nineteenth-century innovations in the area of inscriptive practice are so many theories of language and textuality. They are not the theory of language held by all Americans at the time; they are not "our" theory of language. Instead, they are modest, local, and often competitive embodiments of the way people wrote, read, and interacted over the perceived characteristics of writing and reading. This perspective has a couple of advantages. First, it generalizes from consensus and thus from technologies that eventually proved unworkable as well as workable, since both are revealing sites of negotiation. In this sense the view has "symmetry" according to the sociology of knowledge: it hints at a more complete compass of experience, at the category of technical "workability," in the same way that noncanonical and "sub"-literary works and everyday textuality hin~ at the category of "literariness" in any epoch. Thomas Edison's "electric pen" stenciling devices, to take one example, proved far less successful than office mimeographs as a means of textual duplication, as did numerous other contrivances that never made it to market at all. Yet electric pens and the rest of the objects in the discard pile are no less worthy of study than mimeographs.
Together they permit an interrogation of textual duplication as a socioeconomic and a linguistic fact, part of emerging business practices, shifting labor cohorts, and the burgeoning potential of writing to be all over and all the same, somewhere between manuscript and print. The eventual failure of electric pens reveals something; the eventual success of mimeographs probably tells a little more; looking into the social negotiations of failure and success promises to reveal the most. The second advantage of considering machines for reading and writing as consensual, embodied theories of language is the potential the approach offers for an additionally symmetric account of cultural production and consumption. It does no good to look at theories of language foisted on a blank public by individual and frequently idiosyncratic inventors. No inventor is the beginning of a circuit, sprung whole, like Athena from the head of Zeus. No public is a blank receptor. And "foisting" is far too simple a verb for what I want to call negotiation and appropriation. Like text, new technology is not objectively consumed. As Roger Chartier observes of the former, "Experience shows that reading is not simply submission to textual machinery". Nor, as Marshall McLuhan and Jean Baudrillard are both famous for suggesting, is the experience of text simply a submission to the inscriptive medium of print or computing, the mechanical modes or electronic codes of its presentation and reproduction. The dual symmetries of success and failure and of producer and consumer appeal in theory but prove difficult in practice, because success and production form such powerful forces of historiographic orientation. Technologies that succeed exert a teleological tug: mimeographs tend to erase electric pens on the way to photocopiers and facsimile machines. The physical and commercial shape of the pens is excised from memory and so is the partially linguistic phenomenology of their use.
As moderns and as consumers, we have been conditioned to think that technologies supersede each other one by one, the present ever liberating us from the past. Added to the double problem of forgetfulness, the producers of technology always leave more traces of themselves than consumers do. The makers and purveyors of mimeographs proportionally erase the many more numerous users of their machine by dominating the historical record. Consumers of failed electric pens, by this account, sit smack in a blind spot, equally obscure to history and discomfiting to historiography. Their technology did not "win." They were "only" its users. Even when the fewer users of the pen can be identified-Charles Dodgson, a.k.a. Lewis Carroll, had one'-it is difficult to renovate their experiences from the level of anecdote or emblem to the level of evidence. I am describing a challenge, not an impasse: being careful with questions and patient at archives can unearth a variety of sources for analysis that can help cut across teleological habits. Technology, whether inscriptive or not, involves a lot of paper. Machines get some of their meaning from what is written about them in different ways and at specific junctures, in research plans, patent applications, promotional puff, and so on. Writing machines, in particular, get some of their meaning from the yvay they are used, including the writings they produce. If paperwork can reveal so much about technology, then technology, like science, has a rhetoric of its own. It relies upon rhetorical processes, the conventions of which contribute to a "thick" description of culture, revealing the way American culture sees itself and hinting at the way it identifies and legitimates "the facts." This follows from Edwin Layton's observation, unremarkable among historians of technology today, that technology constitutes a form of knowledge. Rather than an inert and hermetic materialism, technology presupposes a "spectrum," according to Layton, ranging from an idea, through a design, and finally to an artifact and its apprehension and use.
They very rarely exist without linguistic and graphic compliments, labels, descriptions, drawings, and diagrams. In this light technological innovation becomes a process of selecting, sifting, and circulating messages, from the proverbial drawing board to the marketplace and then the drawing room. Artifacts become knowable in part because they are enmeshed within the back and forth and round about of telling what they are, and because telling devolves upon discernable rhetorical conventions, like genres and specialized vocabularies, that are themselves largely the result of unconscious consensus. Economic realities tend to enforce this rhetorical character of technological knowledge by requiring the literature of patents and the literature of commercial promotion. Both the need to identify property and the desire to exchange it ensure an insistently rhetorical character almost unmatched in science, where disciplinary pressures stand in place of commercial ones. Not only does the rhetorical character of technology allow for a "softer" determinism by which machines are not simple, unitary influences on writing but also the same character permits a degree of critique that has eluded all but a few humanist (and those particularly feminist) attentions to science. If technology is a form of knowledge, then it can be conflicted with doubt and contradiction, with assumptions and anxieties, just like other forms of knowledge. The answer to Langdon Winner's provocative question, "Do artifacts have politics?" is affirmative, if only most obviously in cases like the gender politics of Dalkon Shields, or the racial politics of Pullman sleeping cars. Fountain pens and typewriters can be just as ideological, just as much superstructure as infrastructure. Culture insinuates itself within technology at the same time that technology infiltrates culture. Rhetorical analysis provides one way to glimpse the localities of both insinuation and infiltration while testing the usefulness of their directional semantics.
This underlying sense that technology is enmeshed within textuality, that machines are discursively and physically constructed, is a view garnering surprisingly little direct attention. Historians of technology have only lately begun to ponder what they call the "interpretive flexibility" of artifacts possessing "technical content" for "relevant social groups." Drawing upon earlier work in the sociology of scientific knowledge these scholars have tried to set aside the habitual opposition that both divides and defines their discipline, the one between internalist and externalist histories. Internalists practice a sort of formalism, attending more narrowly to how things work, the way one telegraph instrument adapted the form or function of another. Externalists, by contrast, locate things more amid political, economic, and cultural contexts. The newer school of social constructionists rejects both thing and context as separate or separable units of analysis.' According to this view, an invention succeeds not because "it works," but rather it is described as "working" because it succeeds amid prevailing and possibly competitive expectations. Technological function remains something to explain; it does not comprise an explanation in (or of) itself. To put this another way, artifacts are themselves astute, yet they cannot answer all of our questions about why one invention becomes accepted and another does not, any more than a novel, for instance, can answer all of our questions about how it was written and how it was read. Artifacts cannot eveI1. answer with sufficient precision why one model of a machine is "better" than another, just as an edition of poetry cannot speak completely to its own superiority or popularity over other editions. Despite my analogy, the discursiveness of technology has sometimes been hard for scholars of literature, linguistics, and communication to rehearse. Even the most committed social-constructionists seem at times to fall back upon technology as a stable ground amid the roiling, discursive sea.
Both scholars have been influenced by the work ofJiirgen Habermas, who plots the origin and structural transformation of the public sphere in Europe as the creation and then corruption of an abstract level of rational, critical discourse among bourgeoisie. This modern public sphere was created in some degree by anew subjectivity of print in the late seventeenth century-by reading in a new way and by reading novels-and corrupted in the eventual passivity of consumer culture. 6 Like Benedict Anderson and Angel Rama, Habermas grants a great deal of weight to the circulation of print as socially constitutive and transformative. This is a particularly rich background with which to explore the related matter of inscription in the late nineteenth century. The study of inscriptions shows the realm of writing and reading, of symbolic action and experience, in its proximity to objects and machines. From ancient marks on clay or carvings in stone to the printed labels affixed to commercial goods today, inscriptions insistently belie their own double character, both material and semiotic. Modern technology has made some features of this doubleness seem particularly arcane. For example, the original electric meters of the I880s were really halves of little batteries; to "read the meter" a technician had to remove a zinc electrode and weigh it in order to determine the amount of ion deposit, the amount of electrolytic action, which in turn indicated the amount of current that had passed thIough the system. Those ion deposits, like the ion deposits on phorographic plates or strips of celluloid, are the stuff of inscription. They are the double-sided boundary at which the built system both represents technology and is technologically represented. With the same doubleness, the word Representing in my title is both verb and adjective, looking toward technologies represented as well as toward representations and inscriptions generated technologically by the typewriter, the phonograph, and the like. It is a profitable doubleness and, I will argue, particularly revealing of modernity and modern subjectivity.
It is tempting to locate shorthand in the same broad context of the history of literacy as Benn Pitman did. The history of shorthand may indeed be the history of writing; ancient Mesopotamian representations of writing show scribes taking dictation.' The dubious Near Eastern "evolution" from graphical to syllabary to alphabetic writing bears a passing resemblance to the shift from spelled, stenographic shorthand to sounded, phonography, while symbol, syllable, and sound all came under new scrutiny in nineteenth-century shorthand. Moreover, frequent, determinist claims that literacy changes cognition, improves abstract reasoning, and stimulates cultural development, run parallel to claims made for shorthand as rational and scientific, encouraging mental discipline and civic progress. The alphabet is just as much a hero for anthropologist Jack Goody as it was for Benn Pitman. Goody traces the alphabet from Pre-Canaanite to Phoenician to Greek and indicates its seminal influence on economic organization and democratic government. Determinism like Goody's has been absorbed uncritically into numerous historical and literary accounts of literacy and print culture. While many authors, including Goody, have questioned the treatment of orality and literacy as stark, indivisible opposites, anthropologists, psychologists, and cultural critics persist in rating literacy according to orality.4 Different scripts are routinely considered more or less "advanced" in their progress, with the result that the interdisciplines of literacy studies seem to offer little hope of a clear context for shorthand, unmuddied by a posteriori parameters of evaluation.
Pitman even published a weekly periodical printed mostly in phonotypy, The Phonetic Journal, for practice with and appreciation of the phonetic principle. Braced with a knowledge of "common" writing, phonographic longhand, and phonotypy, the student could finally turn to the reporting style. Here different rules of contraction apply. Hooks or loops represent common prefixes, suffixes, or groups of consonants. Vowel markers are generally omitted, the vowel sounds suggested by different lengths and positions of the usual consonants when they are not left to context alone. And long lists of frequently used words are abbreviated to a single letter or a single group of consonant signs. These are the socalled "arbitraries," which some systems were more apologetic than others about using. The sign for p sometimes means "up"; the sign for t sometimes means "it." As the student wades deeper into reporting, contractions become more involved and patently less phonetic. Whole phrases are represented by contractions for words composed of contractions for groups of letters. The avowed principle at the heart of Pitmanic phonography is a one-to-one mapping of sign to sound, in contrast to the Roman alphabet, yet in practice phonographic reporting relies upon a one-tomany mapping of sign to sense. Homonyms and many short or similar sounding words or phrases end up having the same signs in the hands of a skilled reporter. Every boast of "natural" can be met with the challenge of "arbitrary." And every claim of "system" may be qualified hy "personal." Where one-to-one mapping remains pivotal, of course, is in the conversion ofshorthand repotts to full transcripts, where the unique person of the reporter and the necessary uniqueness of transcript stand in for the lacking uniqueness of phonographic signs. Though in theory any reporter can transcribe any report, practice suggested that every reporter be responsible for her or his own transcriptions.
The vociferousness with which rules were promulgated marks the desire to keep every practitioner of a particular system the same-interchangeable parts perhaps, within some larger machine for turning sound into text. Paeans to shorthand as a manner of cultivating habits of memoty and attention undercut the probability of achieving such a goal. Why boast that reporters have "wonderfully improved and mechanically strengthened" their memories if following the rules means producing uniquely sensible reports? The conscious exertions of reporters seemed balanced against their unconscious sensibility. Discipline vouched for accuracy, but exertion undercut probable objectivity. Finally, reporters use different degrees of contraction, even within the same system of phonography, and much remains to be figured out from context while transcribing. With steady use, a system of shorthand can be multiply personalized. Little improvements suggest themselves. Such was the origin of so many of the new, "improved," systems of the nineteenth century. Pitman's phonography itself passed through at least ten different editions, changing incrementally, under the supervision of a Phonetic Council comprised of prominent reporters in Britain and the United States. In 1851, for instance, the Phonetic Council agreed on new consonant strokes for w, y, and h. The resulting ninth edition lasted only five years; the subsequent tenth made changes to the representations of the vowel sounds. This tenth edition caused much dissension, particularly in the United States, and further stimulated the invention of new systems by practicing phonographers. As one prescient commentator noted, Americans launched into "go-as-youplease phonographic authorship," wherein the "exposition of an accepted system soon gave place to the exploitation of individual innovations." For instance, the reporter Elias Longley vaunted a whole new system on the basis of a single new consonant character (Brown, 289). Many authors dissembled the degree of difference that their systems bore to predecessors.
Shorthand publishers made money in five ways. They sold their manuals directly to students. They sold their manuals indirectly to students, through the shorthand schools they established. They collected tuition for study at the schools. They collected tuition for correspondence courses. And finally, they provided skilled reporters for hire, their schools acting as clearing houses and employment bureaus for graduated students." It was a text-based economy without authorship, in which copyright didn't matter, couldn't matter, and allegiances were everything. With intellectual property moot, mental exchange loomed large. Agents were granted exclusive territorial rights to sell books in exchange for signed agreements requiring them to establish schools and promote the system. The Phonographic Institute in London offered the stereotype plates of its books and pamphlets to Americans for relatively modest sums, if only responsible parties would accept exclusive territorial rights in exchange for promoting Pitman's phonography. A board-bound mallual cost less than a half dollar through the I840S; by the late I880s only the most sumptuously bound halldbook cost two dollars.u With prices like these, entrepreneurial eyes were not only on the book trade but also on the educable labor market. The aim of course was to create an ever-growing base of customers wanting to learn just that system. Shorthand publishers competed for market share the way periodical presses competed for circulation and advertising copy. Like the publishers of small-town newspapers, shorthand authors probably generated copy, handled elements of the printing process, and attended to promotion as well as other business matters. (And they took reporting gigs to make ends meet.) But the analogy is imperfect. Shorthand publishers resembled the purveyors of new, component technology as much as they resembled newsmen. They needed to amass market share, but the rewards for doing so were more than purely arithmetic.
The fortunes of the QWERTY keyboard may be even more pertinent. Paul David explains the tenacity of the modern QWERTY keyboard as a matter of economically determined error. The QWERTY arrangement of the original Remington typewriter has remained virtually universal since the I 890s, even though more efficient arrangements have been developed. The market has tipped to the wrong standard. Remington's arrangement was based on that of the inventor ChIistopher Latham Sholes, who wanted to keep the typebars from clashing when the operator typed quickly. Better-engineered machines and then electrics and then computers vitiated the need, yet QWERTY stuck (in parts of Europe, AZERTY). (Reporredly the Remington Company also liked its product name, "type-writer," to appear acrostically in the top row.) David's work has been attacked by S. J. Liebowitz and Stephen E. Margolis. Liebowitz and Margolis challenge David's account of the facts, particularly his identification of a proven-better keyboard, but they also attack his model of the market. Their market is less prone to error. They quickly sketch the early history of market competition and suggest that QWERTY succeeded because it was the best, implying that it may have been easier to learn than its rivals, since ease of tuition could be just as important as ease of use. In the end there is less difference between David and Liebowitz and Margolis than the latter make out. Both parties admit the pressure of standards, even if Liebowitz and Margolis hold that standards are more sensible. All ascribe the conservatism of standards to economics: retooling and retraining make design changes prohibitive. My sympathies are with Liebowitz and Margolis's facts and David's view of the market, which are not necessarily contradictory. The former's description of market competition is forcibly reminiscent of shorthand.
So too did shorthand publishers need to cultivate the labor market in order to disseminate their systems. But the publishers never internalized cost. Though there may have been on-the-job training for typists 'or free typing classes and job placement for typists, little was ever free in shorthand. Rapid training had rhetorical appeal more than it had cost effectiveness. Even the quickest system, if one emerged from the shorthand contests of the later century, like the quickest keyboard, might succeed or fail for any number of reasons, particularly if "quickest" was a matter of inches, as it appears to have been in several documented cases.14 Among the pertinent variables of success were geography, institutional vigor, marketing skills, and access to literate, educable labor, and a variety of target markets. It is impossible to know in retrospect whether or to what degree Gregg shorthand eventually succeeded in the United States because it was quicker or easier, more rational or practical, or because John Gregg most successfully oriented himself near centers of power, within trademark law, and amidst a vigorous and flexible contractual network of book suppliers, employment providers, and educational agents.
These rewards follow the collective accedence to any standard, the individual acquisition of any skill. But they also accrue to any able participation in literacy practices, which interpenetrate the broader power relations of a literate society. The prohibitive expense of retooling and retraining that conserves the QWERTY keyboard finds a compliment in the conservative qualities of literacy practice. Admitted normative characteristics make spelling, for instance, a matter of right and wrong. Misspelling is transgressive and signals the speller's marginal status, either preeducated, uneducated, or sloppy. So knowing and complying with a specific shorthand system, amid its rigorous structure of approved rules and its vociferous promotion of "best" systems, must have lent its users a sense of rightness, of authority, of being in step, which comprises so much of the ideology of literacy. Many disparate elements of different literacy practices are normative, notwithstanding the appreciable liberation and empowerment rightly ascribed to literacy as a whole.
Newspaper reporters in the gallery kept running too, not toward the members of Congress but away from them, in the direction of the Washington telegraph offices. Shorthand reporting thus formed a web of inscriptive action, making the work of Congress public record by doubly making it public and making it record. A similar web had existed before 1848 and 1849, but the promotion and spread of verbatim shorthand reporting made the weave closer and changed the way its patterns appeared. Prior to Pitmanic reporting the only elements of American legislative proceedings to receive consistently detailed treatment were the texts of bills and the prepared speeches delivered by representatives and senators who handed a copy over to the congressional clerks for inclusion in the Globe, or who published copies themselves for franking to constituents. Speeches that were otherwise "taken down by hand" were often shown to their speakers for correction before publication, where they were cut and spliced into the newspapers of the region. American government thus passed into history smacking of oratory, rather than debate, of issues and positions, rather than exchanges, and of arrangements, rather than events. That made democratic government different. Certain details of congressional hearings, for instance, which are today such a fundamental part of civic life, could seldom reach the public eye and inflame the public imagination. While television, not shorthand, is responsible for the immediacy of the McCarthy and Anita Hill! Clarence Thomas hearings, immediacy is not the whole story. What does not or cannot exist as record cannot be made immediate. Before the adoption of verbatim reporting there was less opportunity for hearings and debates to matter, literally, to comprise the material records of governance. They were narrated more properly than they were quoted.
The implication that electrical medicine (electric belts, "vitalizers," and tonics of various sorts) was impractical to the people who used it, or removed from a functionalist model of electrical process, warrants correction. Electrical medicine was used exactly because it was considered salutary, and because electricity and metabolism were understood to function congruently, however mistaken the specifics of this understanding later proved to be. In fact, popular interest in technology has often been functionalist in the truest sense of the word: the idea letters are about machines or devices intended to do things in particular ways, whether they later did them or not. Letter writers reveal their investment in the question of "how things work," with the same directness of Edison compiling his laboratory notebooks. Answers to the question varied greatly, of course, and historians of technology are now beginning to pursue "failures" and alternatives as a subject of inquiry.
The "idea letters" received by Edison are a nebulous lot, making a definitive, quantitative sample of them impossible, if only because their identification was-and remains-somewhat arbitrary. (In the current archival arrangement, perpetual-motion proposals count, Edison Star inquiries do not.) The extant archive does allow of some general impressions, however. Idea letters came from everywhere, but mostly from the United States, from both rural and urban areas. They came from women and children, though the majority were from men. They came from grocery clerks and housewives, medical doctors and farm hands. Writers usually specified lack of training or lack of capital (or both) as their particular claim to outsider status and their impetus from writing. Sometimes many writers would seize the same occasion to write, a news story carried on the wire, for instance, like one incorrect report of 1908 that Edison was working on aerial navigation. In such cases hundreds of correspondents seemed to feel that their ideas had been solicited by the inventor-as they really were during World War I when Edison and other members of the blue-ribbon Naval Consulting Board made a public appeal for suggestions.
Despite this sorting, the remaining idea letters are far from uniform. Typescripts on printed letterhead lie beside handwritten notes on crumpled loose-leaf; the grammatical and well appointed lie beside the unlettered and illegible. Despite their diversity, the idea letters do exhibit identifiable patterns of expression. The most surprising thing about them is that so many concern ideas, not inventions or discoveries, not machines or devices. "Are you in the market for ideas?" queried a livestock merchant from Kansas City, "I have one that I believe would prove serviceable" (Waters 1905)." Like the word "curiosity" during the previous century, the word "idea" here denotes an epistemological currency of learning, a unit of knowing that connects an individual's mind to an experience of nature. But unlike the curiosity cabinet, the idea always possesses a kind of exchange value in the sense that people have ideas, and having appears to have been far easier than inventing. Two days after the livestock merchant wrote, another man inquired, "Do you ever help invent another person's idea?" (McTillen 1905). He writes as if inventing and having an idea were entirely distinct: ideas involve possession while inventions involve action. Writers beseech Edison to "work out" their ideas; the word "out" is as operative as the term "work." "I have several good ideas in my head," writes one man, "but that is as far as they ever got" (Braymer 1915). Ideas are written out, worked out, tried out, carried out, perfected, and made practical. In their outward progress, their path away from the self, they are invented. Their trajectory carries them toward a series of imagined marketplaces, one where ideas are bought and sold, and another where inventions may prove successful. The goal of many correspondents was to become what one termed "a multi-million air" (Parliman 1905).
Such expressions reinforce the fact that writers perceived ideas as property, private and personal, with little sense of collectivity and no recognition of the inevitability avowed by so many contemporary paeans to progress. "The idea" constituted a unit of understanding associated with technological problem solving, its value assumed to be a convertible currency, able to make the progress from the psyche of an isolated owner-citizen to the public world of technological elites and institutions. A republican ideal to be sure, fraught with the ideology of the American dream: as one self-identified "poor little country raised Texas woman" wrote from Oklahoma, her mindthe valuable idea it harbored-was "as undeveloped as her native lands" (Dale r915). Technological possibility was anybody's grubstake, and letters to Edison, like letters to the editor, were part of the arsenal of the public sphere in America, ready-to-hand instruments of republican participation, gesturing at an abstract, rather than personal, level of connectedness.
What were those features? The clock is by itself among the most richly symbolic devices; Lewis Mumford calls it the "key-machine of the modern industrial age." Clock towers "almost defined urban existence". Preindustrial church towers meted out parameters of social identity and psychological composure: in the Old World, London Cockneys defined themselves as a group born within earshot of the bells at Bow Church. Marcel Proust made the receding steeples of Martinville one cynosure amid his A /a recherche du temps perdu. Inside the home, clocks introduced an urban current. This held true even in rural areas, where they were sold by urban-identified salesmen or purchased from urban-based mail-order houses. During the nineteenth centuty, the clock maker was something of a "type" in the New World imagination, embodied by Thomas Chandler Haliburton's humorous character, Sam Slick, an itinerant clock seller true to his name. For all, clocks regulated private lives and connected their regulation to the patterning of social activity elsewhere. They mediated between the private and public, the individual and collective. More pointed forms of the same mediation transformed the workplace in the nineteenth and the early twentieth centuries. Factory time clocks, time-motion studies, and assembly-line time each added new weight to the symbolic burdens of the clock.
Edison proposed the phonograph-clock, assuring his readers "The phonograph clock will tell you the hour of the day; call you to lunch; send your lover home at ten, etc." (534). In Bellamy's short story, a gentleman traveler is awakened abruptly in his hotel bed by a young woman's voice saying, "My Dear Sir, you may possibly be interested in knowing that it now wants just a quarter of three." The effect of these words is so "thrilling and lifelike" that Bellamy's modest protagonist gets up and gets dressed before he lights the lamp to investigate. He spends the rest of the night lying awake, "enjoying the society of [his] bodiless companion and the delicious shock of her quarter-hourly remarks". In both Bellamy's fiction and Edison's wry prognostication, the phonographclock speaks with the voice of decorum, yet for both authors that decorum exits in opposition to titillating circumstance. For many others the phonograph-clock must have inhabited a similar symbolic terrain, interrogating the familiar clock, its regulation of private desires and patterning of social activity. And maybe it was the discomfort of this interrogation that kept the phonograph-clock and its "brazen tablets" from "taking hold," as so many letter writers wrongly predicted it would. On a Simpler level, the recurrent idea of the phonograph-clock continued to mediate berween the largely discarded utilitarian purpose of the phonograph and a sense of having time for leisure. The musical phonograph helped define leisure time and space: in 1907 Edison's National Phonograph Company netted more than a million dollars on phonographs and prerecorded.musical records for home amusement, even after skimming another million off to pay Edison for use of his patents.
While the functional diversity of this shape is some indication of the varied textuality Edison and his staff experienced in experimental telegraphs, printers, and the like, its comparable public apprehension remained more limited to phonograph mandrels and typewriter platens. This chapter shifts the axis of inscription, from the spirals winding around a cylindrical phonograph record to the alphabetic characters, spaces, and nonalphabetic signs that move across the typed page. Like shorthand alphabets and phonographs, typewriters were appropriated within textual practices, which they also had a share in transforming. Phonography and phonographs converted aural experience into inscribed evidence, the former by representing the sounds of speech on paper, the latter by reproducing the same sounds in the grooves of a record. Typewriters intervened more directly into the experiences of writing itself in ways that further interrogated categories of orality, aurality, and textuality. By staying the course as a textual device, typewriters formed an important compliment to phonographs, whIch ultimately diverged dramatically to amusement purposes. The amusement phonograph retained some of the power of text, enrolling authors as producers, writing as hieroglyphics, and machines as readers. Typewriters, however, seemed more certain instruments of textual production, making up in the clarity of their typeface presentation what they lacked as a means of wholly objective representation or reproduction.


In the short space of a current college student’s lifetime, the internet has gone from a specialized, futuristic system to the network that most significantly structures how we engage daily with the world at large. It is now obvious to anyone who uses a computer that intellectual exercises as basic as reading the newspaper or doing research have become fundamentally different activities largely because of the internet. So too have our views of communication in general; the very notion of globalization, so consuming in today’s world, is predicated on the possibilities engendered by a technology barely twenty years old. Such is the nature of “new media.” Computers, and the digital systems and products for which they are currently a shorthand, are what most of us think of when we hear the words new media. And why not? The world of computer hardware, software, email, and ebusiness is for most of us the latest communication and information frontier. Part of our experience of digital media is the experience of their novelty. Yet if we were asked to think of other “new media,” we might have a harder time coming up with obvious examples. We would have no problem citing instances of “old media”: typewriters, vinyl record albums, eight-track magnetic tapes, and the like. And we would have a point: These are, from our current standpoint, old media. But they were not always old, and studying them in terms that allow us to understand what it meant for them to be new is a timely and culturally important task, an exercise that in this volume we hope profitably to apply to media much older than we are. As our title suggests, this collection of essays challenges the notion that to study “new media” is to study today’s new media. All media were once “new media,” and our purpose in these essays is to consider such emergent media within their historical contexts—to seek out the past on its own passed terms.
There is a moment, before the material means and the conceptual modes of new media have become fixed, when such media are not yet accepted as natural, when their own meanings are in flux. At such a moment, we might say that new media briefly acknowledge and question the mythic character and the ritualized conventions of existing media, while they are themselves defined within a perceptual and semiotic economy that they then help to transform. This collection of essays explores such moments in order to enrich our contemporary perspective on what media are, and on when and how they are meaningfully “new.” New Media, 1740–1915 focuses on the two centuries before commercial broadcasting because its purpose is, in part, to recuperate different (and past) senses of media in transition and thus to deepen our historical understanding of, and sharpen our critical dexterity toward, the experience of modern communication. Indeed, we have marked the years between 1740 and 1915 as boundaries for our project because this period is crucial to understanding how electronic and digital media have come to mean what and how they do. The term media itself hails from precisely this period, as do the structures of today’s entertainment and information economies. Thus, the media forms and practices studied in this collection are “new” in a double sense: First, they newly receive the scholarly attention they deserve; and second, they are considered within their original historical contexts, their novelty years. In this, these essays provide a new perspective on the meaning of “newness” that attends to all emerging media, while they also tell us something about what all media have in common. Yet our intention is not only to acknowledge the initial novelty of diverse media, but also to understand better how such media acquire particular meanings, powers, and characteristics. Drawing from Rick Altman’s idea of “crisis historiography,” we might say that new media, when they first emerge, pass through a phase of identity crisis, a crisis precipitated at least by the uncertain status of the given medium in relation to established, known media and their functions.1 In other words, when new media emerge in a society, their place is at first ill defined, and their ultimate meanings or functions are shaped over time by that society’s existing habits of media use (which, of course, derive from experience with other, established media), by shared desires for new uses, and by the slow process of adaptation between the two.
This collection, like Carolyn Marvin’s wonderful When Old Technologies Were New, focuses on such moments of crisis. While it begins with the zograscope and ends in the heyday of silent cinema, the volume does not aspire to cover all forms of media that emerged during the years named in its title. Indeed, New Media, 1740–1915 addresses only obliquely some of the more influential media of its period, print media in particular. Most of the following essays (unlike Carolyn Marvin’s work) focus on media—zograscopes, optical telegraphs, the physiognotrace—that failed to survive for very long. They are, in Bruce Sterling’s words, today’s “dead media.” Yet because their “deaths,” like those of all “dead” media, occurred in relation to those that “lived,” even the most bizarre and the most short lived are profoundly intertextual, tangling during their existence with the dominant, discursive practices of representation that characterized the total cultural economy of their day. Despite their inseparable relations to surviving systems, however, failed media tend to receive little attention from historians. “Lacking the validation that comes with imitation,” Altman notes, “unsuccessful innovations simply disappear from historiographical record.” His suggested corrective for this excessive focus on, for example, “cinema-as-itis,” is an attention to “cinema-as-it-could-have-been” or “cinema-as-it-once-was-for-ashort-time-but-ceased-to-be.” New Media aims to apply some of this “could-have-been” and “was-for-a-short-time” kind of thinking to past new media. Because our understanding of what media are and why they matter derives largely from our understanding and use of the media that survived—those devices, social practices, and forms of representation with which we interact every day—the importance of this kind of analysis is easy to overlook. By getting inside the “identity crises,” by exploring the “failures” (in some cases) of older new media, the essays in this collection will help to counter what Paul Duguid has warned are two reductive “futurological tropes” characteristic of the experience of modern media. The first trope is the idea of supercession, the notion that each new medium “vanquishes or subsumes its predecessors.” From this idea follows the current belief that in the digital age the book is doomed, or, according to the peculiar auguries of earlier times, the conviction that typewriters would replace pens or that radios would replace phonographs. The second futurological trope is the idea of increasing transparency, the assumption that each new medium actually mediates less, that it successfully “frees” information from the constraints of previously inadequate or “unnatural” media forms that represented reality less perfectly.
This assumption creates an interesting paradox. The best media, it would seem, are the ones that mediate least. They are not, as we think of them, media at all. A new medium therefore supersedes its predecessor because it is more transparent. Few would disagree, for example, that a conversation with a friend on the telephone allows for a greater exchange of personal, idiosyncratic information than a dialogue conducted via telegraph. And to a large degree, this thinking is persuasive. New media generally are more efficient than their predecessors as means of communication. Yet there is more to understanding what happens when people communicate through a given medium than merely ascertaining what level of accuracy and amount of data the exchange involves. This observation—that there is more than accuracy and amount to any exchange—comprises a founding rationale for the field of media studies, whether characterized aphoristically by Marshall McLuhan (“the medium is the message”) or more recently expressed (and complicated) in Derridian terms, that the supplement—the “specific characteristics of material media”—can never be “mere” supplement; it is “a necessary constituent of [any] representation.”5 To put it simply, looking for content apart from context just won’t work. Owing in part to the linear progress unthinkingly ascribed to modern technology, media (so often referred to portentously as the media) tend to erase their own historical contexts. Whether shadows in a darkened cave or pixelated images on a luminous monitor, the media before us tend, anachronistically, to mediate our understanding of their past. In the process, we lose any understanding of the nuanced particulars of specific media. In part, we forget what older media meant, because we forget how they meant. Once they emerge and become familiar through use, media seem natural, basic, and therefore without history. Of course we say “Hello?” when we answer the telephone; of course we hear a dial tone when we pick it up to place a call. Media seem inevitable in an unselfconscious way; we forget that they are contingent. Alexander Graham Bell apparently wanted people to say “Ahoy!” when they picked up the phone, but English speakers settled on “Hello?” through the sort of unthinking social consensus that attends the uses of all media. In a similar fashion, the dial tones, 12-volt lines, and modular jacks we use today all were shaped historically by a complex of forces—technological, to be sure, but also social, economic, and representational.
When we forget or ignore the histories of each of these new media we lose a kind of understanding more substantive than either the commercially interested definitions spun by today’s media corporations or the causal plots of technological innovation offered by some historians. For example, it is undoubtedly important to be able to note, as many scholars have, how the invention of the cinema is linked to past practices of, say, lecturing with slides, as well as how it predicts certain elements of future practices. But what we often overlook are the kinds of things that only a deep analysis of specific media cases can offer—how interpretive communities are built or destroyed, how normative epistemologies emerge. No medium new or old exists as a static form. Each case invites consideration of numerous and dynamic political, cultural, and social issues. We might say that, inasmuch as “media” are media of communication, the emergence of a new medium is always the occasion for the shaping of a new community or set of communities, a new equilibrium. As we have suggested, when a new medium is introduced its meaning—its potential, its limitations, the publicly agreed upon sense of what it does, and for whom—has not yet been pinned down. And part of the lure of a new medium for any community is surely this uncertain status. Not yet fully defined, a new medium offers possibilities both positive (one of our authors argues that zograscopes helped construct polite society) and negative (another traces the threat telephones posed to Amish communities). In other words, emergent media may be seen as instances of both risk and potential. Today, for example, the internet offers unprecedented possibilities for global villages to coalesce, even while it threatens national or ethnic cultural traditions and provokes anguished discussions of privacy in a “connected” age. The same sorts of issues and anxieties surrounded the emergence of other media. Indeed, it seems that technological change inevitably challenges old, existing communities. The particulars of each case, however, are valuable to our larger understanding of how media help to shape and reshape culture. Essays in this collection therefore examine media as socially realized structures of communication, where communication is culture—as James Carey explains it—a cultural process that involves not only the actual transmission of information, but also the ritualized collocation of senders and recipients. Habits of communication mediate among people, pragmatically and conceptually. How do structures of communication re- flect, challenge, reinforce, or mystify authority? How do they help imagine community? How do they help construct the aesthetic, or the mimetic? How do they orient the production and experience of meaning?
Ultimately, then, this is a book about framing: about how particular habits and media of communication frame our collective sense of time, place, and space; how they define our understanding of the public and the private; how they inform our apprehension of “the real”; and how they orient us in relation to competing forms of representation. We have selected the cases of new media that follow because they support these inquiries, casting such habits and media into relief, affording a vantage point from which better to see how cultural meanings are negotiated. But this collection is also about how we frame our own discussions of new media, for if this interrogation of emergent media is genuinely to illuminate our understanding of cultural definition and of cultural change, then we must be responsible about our own language. We must, in other words, acknowledge the key terms that are in play in our own discussions and attempt to define and deploy them as precisely as possible, not only for us now, but as they were used in earlier—and different—contexts.
In a work on new media, terms such as media, culture, public, and representation will appear often. But insofar as this collection seeks to understand how the very idea of “media” evolves over time, we wish to employ such critical terms with care and to bring questions about their use and meaning squarely into the discussion itself as it proceeds. Our use of the word technology is a good example. This term denotes, as Leo Marx suggests, a necessary but “hazardous concept”; in this book the term helps organize our thinking about the material, instrumental conditions of modern life, yet for many readers it will also come larded with less considered shades of meaning, assumptions about “Progress” with a capital “P,” or about technology as a preeminent cause in history.8 Thus although we rely on this term as an organizing device in this collection (the essays proceed from technology to technology as a form of convenience), we also wish to urge particular awareness of its hazards. Likewise with other key critical terms. We know that we cannot exhaustively define “media,” for instance, any more than we can completely pin down “culture” (a notion that is, as Naomi Mezey observes, “everywhere invoked and virtually nowhere explained”). Indeed, the cases we offer are about culture as struggle and media as means in that struggle—a fabric continually rewoven according to the interests of a given time and place. Rather than fixing such terms and pinning them to moving targets, however, we can frame our discussions of such pervasive concepts in self-conscious ways that make our attempts to understand them more useful.
In this volume we offer cases that foreground the relationship between material and idea, between what people think or believe or wish and what they feel with their hands or see with their eyes or hear with their ears. Each of the essays in the collection thus reveals, in some fashion, the strong relationship between the contexts for some material, technological development, and shifts in self-imagining and public understanding. Erin Blake, Wendy Bellion, and Laura Schiavo, for example, consider the cultural meanings of perspective and representation in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries by focusing on the emergence of particular visual media (zograscopes, the physiognotrace, and stereoscopes, respectively) and discussing how such media influenced notions of individual identity. Patricia Crain, Katherine Stubbs, and Diane Umble, by contrast, consider the cultural meanings of communication by focusing on the arrival and adaptation of particular networked media (optical telegraphs, electric telegraphs, and telephones, respectively) that helped shape notions of identity in relation to larger communities. All of the authors engage new media as evolving, contingent, discursive frames, sites where the unspoken rules by which Westerners know and enjoy their world are fashioned. Such “rules” continually change, as new media become situated and as such adjustments inevitably redraw the boundaries of communities, including some individuals, and excluding others. Each new medium in effect helps to produce a distinct public. Erin Blake’s work on zograscopes, for example, elaborates the idea that media assist in the construction of the modern, Western public sphere, with its corresponding liberal subject (today known as “the consumer”). Although she draws upon the work of Jürgen Habermas, Blake ignores the often-mentioned circulation of print media as the basis of the public sphere, instead looking to shared social practices to understand how space is visualized. Her public is literally a sphere; in her essay the bourgeois circles of eighteenthcentury London pop into 3-D as they enter the rational and impersonal arena of public space via engravings glimpsed through new optical devices. This new medium, according to Blake, helps the public to map itself. Wendy Bellion’s work on the physiognotrace depicts an American public that also maps itself, but this public is one more complicated by its own experiences of both graphic and political self-representation. By analyzing the American reception of this profile or silhouette-tracing device, Bellion introduces her readers to the cartography of the public sphere, showing the ways in which new media are adapted within the very discursive conditions, the very rules that they help to transform.
Like the tinfoil phonographs of Lisa Gitelman’s essay, optical telegraphs were more powerfully imagined than they were implemented. Very few were ever built or used, yet the idea of them circulated widely within the mentality, the public imagination, of their age. Joseph Lancaster’s classroom telegraphs literally disciplined students, while even broader disciplinary measures may be read in their controlling institutional contexts, as well as glimpsed in the titles of early American newspapers like the American Telegraph [Conn.], Hillsboro[N.H.] Telegraph, and Lincoln [Me.] Telegraph. (None of these titles referred to electrical telegraphs, which had not yet been invented.) In Benedict Anderson’s formulation, the circulation and ritualized consumption of newspapers like these assisted in the imagination of a national community. What their titles and Lancaster’s system suggest, according to Crain, is that the imagination of mediaconditioned the imagination of communities. Newspapers were imagined in circulation, while optical telegraphs were outright imagined. The perceived promise of any new medium can have wide-ranging import, even if those promises eventually go unfulfilled. To many observers, the tinfoil phonographs of 1878 promised a new, more modern and immediate type of text, as recordings might indelibly “capture” speech, without the intercession of literate humans wielding pencils and paper. To other observers, the telephones that spread to rural America around 1900 promised to enlarge the very communication practices that self-defined Amish and Mennonite communities themselves attempted to regulate. The wide popular reception of the first promise, Lisa Gitelman speculates, challenged and helped to transform vernacular experiences of writing and print, while raising questions about the instruments and the subjects of public memory. The Old Order perception of the second promise, Diane Umble shows, helped divide the aggregate Amish and Mennonite population, for this perception coincided with the ongoing regulation of intra- and inter-group communication and excommunication. Although so often the focus of great attention and optimism, new media are not, as these authors pointedly demonstrate, inherently benign; they “bite back.”10 They thrive amid unforeseen consequences, often despite the best, most vigorous intentions of their inventors, their promoters, their initial consumers, or of the customary arbiters of public intelligence.
To scientists, the stereoscope could be used objectively to demonstrate that vision is subjective, that the body can produce its own experiences of depth when presented with the right cues. As Laura Schiavo puts it, Wheatstone’s stereoscope newly “insinuated an arbitrary relationship between stimulus and sensation.” Yet within the context of commercially exploited and popularly apprehended photography, stereoscopes were ultimately recast as mimetic amusements that tendered to consumers an instructive and positivist model of how their eyesactually worked to see the world as it really is. Vernacular discourse, in other words, completely inverted the meaning of what the stereoscope “proved.” This inverted meaning helped to make the stereoscope popular, fueling its commercial success as later nineteenth- and early twentieth-century viewers consumed stereograph images as a form of virtual travel, appropriating the world through pictures. At stake was far more than the prestige of Wheatstone or the anti-intellectualism of the marketplace. The rules by which the West knew the world had again come into play. The popularity of stereoscopes helped redraw the very category of the “real,” the consensual practices of “accurate” representation. Assumptions about what count as “rules,” about what is “real” or “accurate” or “normal,” are no less at issue when new media are less popular than stereoscopes were or less patently involved in describing normal human perception. Media emerge and exist in ways that both challenge and regulate notions of what it means to be human. Gregory Radick’s essay provides a clear-cut case. An amateur ethologist using the new medium of recorded sound set out to learn the “language” of monkeys and stumbled into one of the hottest debates in Victorian evolutionary biology and linguistics: How is language uniquely human? In the course of his research, Richard Garner’s recording phonograph became an instrument of knowledge deployed in various philosophic and scientific controversies—in the tension between amateur and professional science, for example, or in the dispute over whether abstraction or instinct founds thought and language, or in discussions about the fundamental differences between humans and animals. Garner worked on monkeys, but not without meddling with the category of the human in two ways. First, he raised anew the definition of “Man” as “the talking animal”; second, he wielded his phonograph as if it were a necessary—and better—third ear.
Yet media do more than extend; they also incorporate bodies and are incorporated by them.11 Media are designed to fit the human, the way telephone handsets or headsets literally fit from ear to mouth, but also the way telephone circuits, satellites, and antennas fit among their potential consumers, as integral parts of communication/information networks that literally shape what communication entails for individuals in the modern age. And if media fit humans, humans adjust themselves in various waysto fit media, knowingly and not. Hands physically adjust themselves to different keyboards, different keypads, and different pointing devices, while users subtly adjust their sense of who they are. Some of these complexities may be glimpsed in Katherine Stubbs’s essay, which reads the history of electrical telegraphy in the United States against and within the fiction that appeared in telegraph trade journals. Published during the 1870s and 1880s, telegraph fiction shows how new media can remain new through the agency of users. Amid ongoing conflicts between labor and capital arising in part from the feminization of the workforce, telegrapher-authors both used and represented the telegraph as a means to explore identity in its relation to the body. In remaking themselves, by negotiating gender-at-a-distance-and-by-telegraph, for instance, telegraphers kept the character of their medium unsettled. In other words, the “newness” of new media is more than diachronic, more than just a chunk of history, a passing phase; it is relative to the “oldness” of old media in a number of different ways. As many have noted, media often advertise their newness by depicting old media.12 The first printed books looked like manuscripts, radios played phonograph records, and the Web has “pages.” Ellen Gruber Garvey and Paul Young each explore less familiar instances in which the new represents the old in order to understand more fully the purchase that “newness” has on the process of representation. As Garvey’s account of scrapbooks explains, scrapbook-makers took old media—literally the old books and periodicals they had lying around—and made them into new media in the form of scrapbooks. “Newness” in this case resonated as much with personal and domestic experiences as it did with public and collective apprehensions of novelty, posterity, or periodicity. Scrapbook-makers tampered with the meanings of the scraps they collected by collecting them, a practice Garvey refers to as “gleaning” and connects to the composition and use of the Web today. Young, on the other hand, presents a “telegraphic history of early American cinema,” reading filmic representations of telegraphs as only the most obvious link between these two media, which seem, in retrospect, so different.
We hope these essays will help to broaden the inquiry of media studies by calling attention to the ways media are experienced and studied as the subjects of history. No ten essays can do more than open the question, but opening the question is crucial, we think, particularly as today’s new media are peddled and saluted as the ultimate, the end of media history. “Newness” deserves a closer look. To that end, we include a brief section of documents for discussion. These documents are not illustrations of our text as much as they are artifacts that themselves point toward the rich and diverse record available to media historians. We hope that they will suggest specific historical and cultural meanings for media and promote a broader discussion of media history. Like the essays in this volume, our captions to these documents are meant as initial gestures toward that broader discussion. We include them to remind readers that the history of media is an ongoing, highly self-reflexive conversation about what we mean and—literally—how we mean it.
