Hey all!

Starting a new thread, since that last one was about 100 messages thick and had the wrong subject line anyway. :P

Good news!  I've just gotten off the phone with our new contact at Tækker, Herr Marcel Magdeburg, and learned that Tækker himself has looked through our application and given the OK!  So, the next step is for aBe and I to meet with Marcel in person to discuss the contract next Wednesday.  At that time we hope to negotiate for the renovations period that we discussed a couple meetings ago.

We're nearly there!

The next steps for all of you lovely people will be to fill out a membership form to join Lacuna Lab (if you were not at the founding meeting), and a letter of intent to pay rent for space at PLU44a.  We're working on those forms now, so keep an eye out for them in the next email from us.

Thanks for helping make our co-creation space a reality!  Hope to see you all in person soon to celebrate over sekt (or other appropriate fizzy drink).

Woohooo!

yippiiieeeee !!! :D

Nice! Jemma (some of you might know her through code jam, or stammtisch) is interested in the place as well, now added to the discussion :)

That’s such great news!  Thanks for the update, and thanks so much for everyone's work on making this happen!!! Let me know if there’s anything you need help with! 

Super great news! 

awwwyeah

Yes!!! 
Added Kyla to the list, she's also interested in joining in

sweeeet
we should have a party :)- also for getting to know each other- so many new peepz

thumbs up for party!

First party in the space is gonna be awesome!

Hi peeps, just lettin ya'll know that i cant come tonight. im still stuck in wannsee finishing up some work.. enjoy everybody, ill try to stop by a little later.. :)

Did I miss something?

its not an official PLU meeting, but just a meetup where many of us often go to . ya know

Hey all!

So aBe and I met with Herr Magdeburg at Tækker this morning to go over the contract.

Unfortunately there remain a couple paperwork hurdles for us to jump before we can actually sign the contract and get the keys, namely around getting the e.V. officially notarized.  And we may, in turn, need confirmation from the Finanzamt about our e.V. application in order to get notarized, so we might be stuck in a holding pattern until we hear from them.  We'll definitely keep you updated on that as it develops.

The contract itself looks good: it's in the name of Lacuna Lab e.V., with a move-in date of 1. May 2015. Also, as soon as we have our e.V. notarization (and another from Tækker's notary), we can take the keys and start working in the space.  That is to say, our first few weeks there would be rent-free, depending on how quickly we can get the notarization done.

For the money matters: The Kaution is a bit more than we anticipated, as Tine told us it would be 3x monthly rent, but the contract calls for 5x.  We are probably able to get it down to 4x instead, but we shall see.

Also, aBe and I have been doing some market research about what sorts of plans and prices co-working spaces around Berlin offer, so we should have some set prices and plans soon.  Keep an eye out for that "intent to pay" form that I promised in the last email.  :)

That's all the news for now--sorry that we can't bust out the confetti just yet!  But that just makes it all the more exciting when we finally can!

Yo,

Thanks for the update on today.

Just to confirm, what are the order of the steps for gaining officialness of the e.V.?

Also was the 3-month Kaution originally promised or just given as a guideline?

We are waiting for a response from the Finanzamt, where we sent the eV
documents. That's one step.

What the immobilien wants is a document from the notary. One notary said
we first need the Finanzamt document. But we will call two other ones
tomorrow to make sure.

When we have the notary document, we can sign and get the keys.

Soma here, with an update on the status of the Lacuna Lab co-creation space.

The Paperwork

So over the past two days, Thomas, aBe, and I have met with a notary to officially petition for entry into the Vereinsregister, a necessary step to giving our e.V. legal standing.  As previously mentioned, this was a prerequisite for our signing the property contract with Tækker.

We now have the paperwork that Tækker was looking for, and could in theory go forward with signing the contract next week, but, with the help of our translator (thanks again Thomas!), we discovered that there a few issues we need to address in the contract before signing it.  Namely, one line could be interpreted to mean that we could not use the space as an atelier or event space, another may give Tækker the right to evict us for no reason, and another may imply that going forward in our current state could be financially unwise, particularly for aBe and I, who are held personally responsible for everything until the e.V. is officially founded.

All that said, we would like a little more time to go over the contract and amend what we can.  (We're looking out for you!)  As always, we'll keep you updated as new information develops.

I know it's been slow going (trust me, I know), but it's worth being punctilious now, to avoid unhappiness in the future. :)

Next Meeting

We also think it would be good to have another gathering sometime soon, not just because I miss you guys, and we have some new faces to introduce (:D), but also so we can officially nail down some questions, including:

    Who is officially committed to joining the space, and for how long?
    What pricing tiers will we offer?
    How should we divide the space, usage-wise, and which activities/abilities are most important to everyone?

We'd like to get a more concrete financial plan together, so having input from everyone about what level of commitment they can make will be very useful.  I plan to put together a few options for pricing plans and space usage that can get the conversation started when we meet.

And now, the most fun part: finding a time that works for everyone!

Please fill out this Doodle to let us know when you're available.  Since it can be quite hard to get a big group like this together, please try to be as available as possible, so we can maximize attendance. :)

Don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions.

Looking forward to seeing you all in one place!  And I'm really hoping the *next* time we're all in one place, it's in the studio. :)

hi all, I haven't introduced myself as of yet, but I have been getting these emails via Steffan and am very interested in this project, looking forward to meet all of you and hear more in person!
(I am an artist working in the fields of performance/dance and mask making, recently graduated from an MA and have been searching for just such a collective space/innitiative to be part of :) 

I am very happy things are walking!

Im going to Australia tomorrow. I will be back in June 9th. 

Please, let me know the procedures and the discussions of the meetings..
Also, keep me informed about the news. Sorry i will not be able to be in the next meetings...

don't forget that I am IN!

Have a nice spring start!

Thank  you peepz for your effort. I would say even tho it seems so close we shouldn't  hesitate with the plu space. But reading somas mail you don't seem so. As you know I found them a little  fishy all the time.  at least a month in advance to make the space allright is still a must I would say.
There should be still other options we should be able to find, especially now more eyes are looking and we have an e.V. Now. 
Wow so many new people! Hi Kyla!  

Do we have a location yet for the meeting on Wednesday? We could go to Cafe Katulki like for the previous e.V. meeting.  :)   

So excited to meet the new people, and getting Lacuna Lab closer to being a reality!! 

So the masses have spoken, and the next Lacuna Lab meeting will be held...

on 22. April 2015, at 1700.

at Prachtwerk ( Ganghoferstr. 2, 12043 Berlin )

It's a sizable cafe/bar with a good atmosphere that shouldn't have any trouble fitting us all.

We will discuss options for membership tiers/fees, running costs for the space, and membership contracts.  It won't be all business though: we also have some new faces to introduce in the group--let's all have a drink (alcoholic or otherwise) and get to know each other better!

Let us know if you have any questions beforehand.

Looking forward to seeing you all on Wednesday!

As some of you already know, I’ve been in contact with the BioTinkering e.V. about them possibly joining us in the PLU space to build a Bio-Hack lab.  A member of their group, Rüdiger Trojok, will be joining us tomorrow for the meeting, although unfortunately he can’t make it until 6:30pm.  So if any of you would like to meet him and learn more about their group, you might want to stay around for that.  :)

Just wanted to drop you a line to let you know that aBe, Alex, and I just left the meeting with Tækker, and the contract has been signed! ((cue applause))

We negotiated a renovation period of three weeks, so rent isn't actually due until 16 May. ((cue more applause))

But don't pop the champagne and sekt just yet--we still have a paperwork hurdle or two more to do before they hand us the keys.  We hope to get these done ASAP and receive the keys sometime next week.

As always, I'll pass along the information as soon as we have it.

Thanks to everyone that came out last night and signed contracts!  It really helped to pull me out of the paperwork dumps and remind me that we're doing this to get awesome people together to do awesome things.

The next meeting should definitely be in The Space.  :D

superswag! feel kissed :~)

got a callback from the notary.

We can have an appointment on monday at 14:00. They have a state approved (vereidigt) translator inhouse.
The fee will be around 200 plus half an hour Dolmetscher, she said.

The notary will exchange with Magdeburg to receive the documents. We can decide to bring in our own translator as we like or still cancel the meeting. Taking the inhouse Dolmetscher would safe us travelling costs.

Cool, thanks Alex. Are you arranging the payment? Do you need us to give our share of the cash beforehand?

Applause, applause! Second the motion to extend many thanks to all those involved for all of your hard work:) So very excited to have met you all and to meet the space.

I wonder how much half hour costs.

BTW, they don't normally take cash. They send invoices.

It's a good amount of money, but I doubt many other notaries have
in-house interpreters AND could give us an appointment in two days.

I called recently notaries and they were giving appointments in one or
two months. Then coordinate an official translator that must go there...

I suggest we take this one. What do you think?

Then we have the keys next Tuesday (in theory).

It's a bit of a hit but we're dividing it among us and it's just this once. I would also go for it.

I don't think there's a meeting decided yet.

But we did go to the Notar on Friday, spent a few hours there and
received the paper we needed to get the keys.

Next step is to bring that paper to Herr Magdeburg, visit our space
with him (or someone else from Taekker), make a detailed description
and photos of the current state of the rooms, and then get the keys.

Finally that we need to get several insurances, a contract with the
electricity company, another one for the Internet, and start renovating.

We start paying rent May 16th.

Have a good weekend!

Just a quick note to say, tomorrow morning, 11:30am, is when we should finally be receiving our keys.

As part of the handoff, we will be taking record of the condition of the space, and a few other last bits of paperwork.

We'll drop you a line as soon as we're in to let you know the state of things (e.g., is there electricity yet?), and to send out an invite for the next meeting, the first in our new home!

Just dashing off a quick note to let you all know--keys have been transferred!

We spent the afternoon doing the Übergabeprotokoll (listing any known defects, etc.), and then waiting at Telekom to get an appointment for Internet installation (20. May).

The electricity is *on*, but there aren't many lights installed, so a night meeting might be tricky in the short term, unless maybe we all bring candles.  :)

I have to rush along to my German class now, but I'll send along a Doodle tonight to schedule our first meeting IN THE SPACE!

Finally, I have a moment to sit down and craft that email I promised you.

Let me first say I am super stoked that we are finally moving on to the next phase of our plan for world domination.  Everything feels much more real now that we're no longer shuffling papers and imaginary ideas, but instead have keys to come and go as we please.

So, that said, let's figure out when we can all meet up there!

Pick your favourite time

I'm favouring daylight hours because, as previously mentioned, the lighting situation is suboptimal at the moment, and I'm not sure how usable the space is at night yet.

Thanks again to everyone for all their help and energy in getting this crazy project rolling.  Let's build a community we can all be proud of.

I can't wait to see what happens when we're all settled in and making the space our own!

The masses have spoken once more (thanks for such quick replies!), and the next meeting will be...

Sunday, 10 May 2015, 1:00pm

at
Paul-Lincke-Ufer 44A, 2.Hof, Aufgang A, 1.OG

a.k.a.
Lacuna Lab

But of course we don't have to wait 'til Sunday to start things moving!  Like Séamus mentioned, there's plenty of clean-up to be done (dusting, wiping, sanding, painting, disinfecting...).

Séamus, aBe and I will be there from 1:00pm today, so feel free to drop on by.

I have to leave around 4:30pm for German class, but maybe aBe can stay longer if people are interested.

Until we get keys sorted out, one of us will try to be there as often as possible to facilitate "opening hours".  :)

By the way, here's my phone number, in case you need a more immediate medium than email:
0152 03748201

See you in the Space!

Sounds great! My mom is visiting so I may not be able to stop by before sunday. Will try my best though...

We're out running errands now, so hopefully no one is planning to drop by who hasn't already...

We'll have cleaning supplies on hand tomorrow, and might do a Bauhaus run, too.

More details later!

We'll be back working on the space again tomorrow. We can work in shifts throughout the day so check on this thread that someone will be there for you if/when you want to come along and help.

would be great if someone could help with a vacuum cleaner.

And we might think about little improvements on the vip room ;)

Looking pretty much forward to creating together a magical space!

1. Should we use hackpad instead of e-mail?

2. I saw a circular metal brush at ALDI for 15€ to be mounted in a
drill, to scratch paint away. I have a drill. I would wet the wall
before using such a tool to avoid breathing harmful paint dust. Should
we get such a brush?

3. Does anyone have goggles for protecting the eyes?

1. I just created lacunalab.hackpad.com.  Hooray, we now have a place for collaborative documents!  (Seriously, hackpad is great.  Didn't realize they were bought by Dropbox...)

2. That drill attachment sounds like a brilliant tool.  I was not looking forward to sanding the walls by hand.

3. I know Alex has one pair of goggles, and I was thinking to grab a few more cheap ones and masks for painting/bleaching protection.

Like Séamus mentioned, we plan to be in the Space again tomorrow from around 11, continuing work on the bleach party we started today.  I'll have to leave again at 16.30, but yes, working in shifts to get the place cleaned up would be super swell, if people are up for it.

Was good to see those of you who dropped by today!  Hope to see you all in the coming days!

Also, that sekt that I kept talking about not opening?  We're opening it on Sunday.  Bring a cup.  :)

Feeling pretty stressed about a couple of events this month so not much time right now unfortunately. But I will try and put in some time this weekend.

I am sorry that I havent made it to any of the meetings, but I realized that I am actually not in a place to get involved with this project, as beautiful as it does sound.
i look forward to experiencing the greatness that surely shall evolve out of it!
but for now, i guess you can remove me from this email list ;)
best of luck with all,

Just a quick note before bed to say THANK YOU for such an awesome day in the space today.

I'm seriously astonished at how much we were able to get down in such a short period of time, and it's a testament to the quality of our crew.

Can't wait to see what the coming days hold, as we transition from working *on* the space to working *in* the space.

Alex, Nayeli, and I will be there bright and early tomorrow morning, so come on by, or give us a call (0152 03748201).

And don't forget to take a look at and add stuff to the Hackpad I keep blabbing about!

This is so exciting. Big shout out to all of you for your hard work! I'm sorry to have missed the activities last week (I'm working more than full time atm). Hope to see some of you Tuesday and otherwise as we activate the space in the coming weeks. Whoop!
Hey beautiful people,

Alex, Nayeli, and I are here since 7am, and we got a first coat on the wall behind the kitchen sink before running out of paint.

So we'll need to make another Bauhaus run at some point if we want to finish the walls.

Though I was planning on staying the whole day through, I need to duck out at some point for errands.

Can we get a sense of who is planning to be around today, and when?
we are currently renovating our office - there is one full bucket of
white colour (Universalweiss von Bauhaus) left. Could you use that?
(It's at Luisenstraße close to Charité)

you can also call me at 0176 78408702

Hope to find some time this week to help you guys in the space - thanks
for all the work so far!
I have 2 painting rollers, buckets, brushes and some plastic sheets. Is this of help? Someone can pick them up from my house over the river shinkestrasse, my boyfriend is home. Otherwise I can bring tomorrow.
We're going to close up shop for now, since there's not so much to do without supplies.

Current plan is to meet up again at 13:30 at Bauhaus (Hasenheide) to buy more paint, then head back to Lacuna and use it.

Let us know via email or phone if and when you're able to join!

btw, i have a circular saw that might make it easier to cut the door or
anything else. i'm working out of home today but i can bring it tomorrow
morning if it's useful.
We're all heading out now. Got a few things at Bauhaus, including paint, so we can continue that project next time people gather.

No one will be around tonight, so let's just regroup tomorrow.

In thinking about to coordinate until we get keys figured out... Shall we just keep announcing who will be in when, or would people rather update a shared google calendar to mark when they're able to come in? I can set that up if people would find it useful.
I think the google calendar is useful.
I can be there tomorrow from around 2 pm.
If everything worked according to plan, you should have all received notifications about the email list and shared calendar I just created.

Email List: lacunalab@googlegroups.com
Calendar: Lacuna Lab Calendar

You should all be able to add events to the calendar too, so that should make it easier to coordinate who can come when, and we can plan our renovation plans accordingly.

Alex, Nayeli, and I spent more than a little time today just basking in the greatness that is our space--we've managed to turn it from a dark, dank cave into a bright and inviting workshop in around 48 hours!

Thanks again for all your help, and I look forward to seeing you all more this week!

It only gets better from here.
Sorry for flooding everyone's inboxes tonight, but if any of you *didn't* just receive an email from me titled "[Lacuna Lab] Email List and Shared Calendar", let me know.

Just want to make sure the mailing list is set up properly.
Just a quick note: if anyone wants to get in the space today, give Ramin a call at 0176 20504057.

He works just a few doors down from the space and can let people in on short notice.

Thanks Ramin!
I got a call from the insurance guy.

home 093122067
mobile 01718239666
wolfgangfries@web.de

He said it did not make much sense what the contract says about the
required insurances, and he only recommended hapflichtversicherung for
275€ a year, and that people should have their own insurance for
materials and laptops.

Could you maybe call him to find out how it compares to your contact?
I did not understand every detail about it...
Ok. I include Soma, Alex and James in the reply to keep them informed.

I didn't post this on the hackpad because it included contact information.
A friend has a spare desk and is asking, if somebody wants it. I don’t have a car. May anybody take it from Neukölln to Lacuna Lab? (Adress will follow).
Just a quick note to remind everyone that we start paying rent tomorrow, so it would probably help if we gave you all an IBAN to use, yes?  :)

DE58 4306 0967 1174 5008 00

That is the Lacuna Lab e.V. account to which you can pay your rent.  Remember: this month only half is due.  The first full month's rent will be due on the 1st of June.

Thanks again to everyone for helping turn the space into something bright and inviting!

And how about that video that aBe found of the previous tenants?  They set the bar for partying pretty high--hopefully you guys are up to the challenge for our Opening Party!

Also, a bunch of us will be at co.up all day tomorrow for a special edition of the Creative Code Jam, featuring the Berlin Science Hack Lab.  Hope to see you there!
is anyone going to be there today? i can pass by today and help with
anything that needs to be done. i'll probably have sometime during this
week but not sure.
Thanks, I think probably not, because we don't have paint nor ladders,
and we need those to continue.

I hope we get them soon.

BTW. someone offered paint (we got an e-mail). I think it's somewhere in
Mitte. If someone can pick it up... it should be on a past e-mail.
Hope you all had a nice weekend!  Soma here, with some thoughts on our final steps toward activating the space!  (Thanks Phoebe for that great phrase--I love it).

This email will be a longer one, but the content is all designed to be user-friendly, so strap in and let's do this.

And if you really only have time to read one thing, skip to the DOODLE.

Painting!
So far every wall has been covered in white at least once (except the lift room, which was looking pretty nice and white already).  We can do another coat or two in places where we really feel it's needed, but otherwise, next up is ceilings, and then floors.

I plan to stop by Bauhaus sometime tomorrow to pick up some paint for the ceiling, so we can start doing that as soon as tomorrow afternoon.  I figure we should do the ceilings before the floors, because gravity.

For the floors, aBe brought in some grey paint that's meant for roofing, but preliminary tests show that it should be fine for our floors, too.  The common wisdom for painting the floors seems to be three-step:
1) clean the floors. 
2) prime the floors with Tiefgrund (which we have already, and which requires 12 hours to dry).
3) paint the floors.

Once the ceilings and floors are done, I think we're pretty much ready to start moving things in!

I think it's not unreasonable to think that, if we all pitch in this week when we can, we could finish painting by the end of the week, and have everyone moved in by the end of the following week.  (We can coordinate a rental truck to make rounds and collect everyone's things, if that turns out to be worthwhile.)

Access!
I know the key situation is a major barrier to having the space feel like its truly ready and belongs to all of us, and the electronic door lock is one of my highest priorities.

In the meantime, though, Ramin has offered to be a keybearer during the day, since his office at IXDS is just a few doors down the street.  Give him a call if you want to get in anytime there's no one in the space.  His number is on that Hackpad I keep talking about.

Next steps!
One bit of news is that we should have Internet access in the space starting Wednesday.  Many thanks to Alex for taking that bit of paperwork on.

It would be really helpful if everyone could keep the calendar updated, at least for this week, so we know when people will be able to help with the cleaning and the painting.

I figure it would also be good to have another meeting next weekend, so we can all assess our progress together, start planning how to move things in (truck rental, etc.), how to organize maintenance of the space going forward, and also start ideas spinning about the inevitable Activation Party!

So, that said, it's time for another DOODLE.  Let us see when is the optimal time for us to convene. :)

Whew, OK, so I think that covered all the immediacies.  Let me know if there's another questions, comments, concerns, etc.

Eager to get everything finished up, and can't wait for the energy we'll all bring together into the activated space!

would be great if someone could support to get internet connection, as I will be out of town till thursday.

The Telekom guy will be coming on wednesday between 16:00 and 18:15. The Hauswart Bernd will be there, as well, to grant acces to the basement.
I went to Telekom to print out the Auftragsbestätigung, it is now in a basket in the kitchen area.

Best regards and thanks, see you soon.
Running late today.  ><   I'm heading to Bauhaus shortly to grab more paint, and will be in the space between 14:30 and 15:00.

If anyone gets there before then, and is itching for something to do, we can probably start prepping the floor of the former porn room (now the "corner office"? :) ) by vacuuming and mopping.  The white water-based paint that we've scattered everywhere comes up surprisingly easily with a little water and scrubbing (aBe and I were using sponges and steel wool).
Thomas and I are in the space now, painting the worst spots of the ceiling with a ladder we borrowed from the neighbors.

If anyone is around this evening to keep the train moving, that'd be great! :)

Unfortunately I have to leave for German class soon, but can come back at 20:30 if people are still around.
I'm in class now, but I left the keys with Thomas and Seamus.

If people are still there later after class, I can come back and keep working :)
I would appreciate it if Soma could open the doodle to allow other times than the weekends as I'm not in Berlin almost every weekend. Same goes for Rin and it would be awesome if team swocket could attend the meetings aswell!
We had a good day in the Space today, finishing up the yellowest spots on the ceiling.  Thanks to help from Sarah, Nayeli, Arturo, and Carolina, the painting is now almost completely done!

We also did a number on the bathroom areas, so, while they're still not *nice* yet, they hopefully look significantly cleaner than the last time you saw them. :)

The only white painting we have left is the space above the loft (which is primed and ready to be painted with our new thicker paint tomorrow), and the reddish wall in the corner office, which still has some red showing through two coats of white.

Arturo will be bringing one last 10L of white paint into the Space tomorrow morning.

Thomas had mentioned a sealing spray that might help us prep the red wall before a third coat?

Carolina and Arturo did a great job cleaning up the Lift Room today.  Assuming we don't paint the floors in there, I'd say it's pretty much ready for move-in!

Going Forward
The next undertaking, then, will be the floors.  We have some roof material that aBe bought, but we're not totally sure it's kosher for internal floors yet... In the meantime, we can continue cleaning and priming the floors.

So tomorrow we can start by using the thicker ceiling paint in the loft area (maybe after putting a drop cloth down?  That wood might be harder to clean paint from than the concrete floors...), and by cleaning the floors in the corner (porner) office.

Also, if anyone has any extra overhead lighting fixtures floating around, now would be a good time to bring them in and install them, while we've got our borrowed ladder.  :)

The Next Meeting
So far it looks like this weekend is not a great time for the next meeting, as most people can't make it.  I only favoured weekends because, historically, that's been the best time for people.

Would a weekday evening work better for people?  Let me know. :)

Lacuna Activation is imminent.
Another good day in the space.  This report will be short, though, because I am very tired.

Switched my German classes to mornings, so I will be able to stay later in the evenings now.  This is a big part of why I am very tired.

Sarah and Jemma did a ton of touch-up work in the kitchen and entry areas today, and things are looking pretty spiffy.  Séamus and I got the ceiling and walls of the loft area, so there's spiffiness there, as well.

Arturo and Carolina cleaned up (thoroughly!) the floors in the corner office, and Séamus did the last bit of exorcism on the animal print (photographic evidence below).  Jemma also primed the seeping-red wall, so tomorrow we should be able to give it its (hopefully) final coat of paint.

Sadly, the Telekom technician never showed up, so we are still without Internet.  :(

We're actually approaching a point where the next steps are preferential and non-obvious, which is why I thought it would be good to get everyone together at once, to discuss preferences, visions, subcommittees, etc.

I've added a few more options to the Doodle for weeknight times, so hopefully we can achieve a quorum.  Please go ahead and update your availability so we can get the next meeting scheduled!

That's all for now.  We still need light fixtures. :P
Only three of us were signed up today, and since there's only one wall left to paint and a few floors to mop, and since the weather is beautiful, we figured we could call it a day off and have a picnic.

No specific plans on where/when yet, but if you're game to join, give me a call!
Regarding our next meeting: So far there's a tie between tomorrow afternoon and Wednesday evening for 7 people. Tomorrow would be preferable so we can move forward with things but maybe we can get more than 7 people some day next week. We're still missing some entries in the doodle.
I def can not tomorrow afternoon. Def can Wednesday. Just added myself to calendar.
I would come on Wednesday - tomorrow I would have to leave early.

Can I tell our members, that there are two meetings tomorrow and on Wednesday?
I also vote for 2 meetings. 
there is only one problem-
Abe can't attend on any of the two.
FYI, my phone, a.k.a. mobile office, has been malfunctioning for some reason--apologies if I've missed any calls or texts from you.  Going to Vodafone today to see what's wrong.

I'm a fan of the two-meeting plan, because with the two most popular dates combined, we can get everyone into the space, which will be good for debate, information dispersal, and for administrative things, like making sure everyone has signed a contract for the space and is an official member of the e.V.

That said, the next two "sub"-meetings will be:
Hello to everyone from Spain 

I just wanted to send some info about the current money situation (since
I'm the only one with access to online banking for now).

Our rent for May is 1.048,39€, which was due May 16th.

From that amount, Lacuna Lab's bank account has received 700€ from
Cyborgs e.V, Arturo, Carolina, Nayeli, Aurelia, Soma, Jem, Ramin, aBe &
Sarah.

We still need 348.39€ to cover May's rent, and next week we should
already pay June.

That's all the moN€w$ for now.
Sunny (cool) greetings from the South!
It was mentioned in the e-mail titled "Lacuna Lab : Rent" from May 16th.

For May we pay half the normal monthly rent. That means that each
Lacunan also pays half of whatever they normally would pay (150 => 75 or
100 => 50).
Just a quick one. Some people were finding the Hackpad a bit hard to make sense of. I've volunteered to be an editor of sorts, i.e., to keep the information as clear and concise as possible.

Please go to our new Start Here Hackpad and let me know if things are in anyway still unclear and I'll fix it for you. Otherwise keep adding all your wonderful ideas in there.
just so i don't forget the link this evening on the meeting:

it's not super big but i think it should be enough, in any case i think we all live near lacuna so we can even do several trips if we need.

it's 25€ for the whole day, let's talk it later but i'd rent it for the full day on sunday and move everything. 
So for the people who weren't at today's meeting Aurelia, Thomas and I presented Trello as a way to manage tasks and projects for Lacuna Lab. Here are some of the advantages we saw:

    Decisions and discussion happening out in open (comments)
    Clear overview of tasks and who is doing them
    Members can be assigned to tasks
    We can all work with it remotely
    Discussion about tasks is no longer in your inbox
    Keeping overview of votes on whether or not to do things
    Remote voting
    Deadlines, if we want them
    Linking to external docs
    Smooth conversion of meeting points into tasks


The biggest drawback is having to use "yet another tool" but in fact Trello will become your point of entry for everything. We'll still use Hackpad for reference and persistent documents but those will be linked to from Trello.

You should have received an email giving you access by now. If you have any trouble getting access and seeing our board, let me know.
Just a quick note before bed to thank everyone for their work at and between both parts of our special two-part meeting series.  Special thanks to Séamus, Aurelia, and Thomas for organizing our electronic hive-brain.

Seriously, check out the work they did seeding our Trello board--suddenly the space seems that much more manageable.

We'll have the last of the painting done by this weekend, and then it's time to rent a truck and move in!  Everyone who wants to share the truck and move some stuff in with us should follow the instructions on this card here.

Once we know who wants what where when, we can solve the Traveling Salesman problem and start building our workspace in earnest.

Looking forward to the next stage of Lacuna Activation!

(And I promise that sekt is coming soon.)
as I told today I would like to schedule the Cyborgs e.V. meeting every 3rd and 17th of the month. Before I announce that and put it into the calendar please tell me, if you are fine with that.

I’d love to announce our „bring a chair“-party for Wed June 3rd to our members.
I've been looking at kleinanzeigen for some cheap ceiling lights, as in less than 10 EUR. I was imagining them to be placeholders, or a basis for something creative, unless they were actually nice. I've already taken action on some lights, and some are still pending. I'd appreciate your feedback - just look at the trello page on lighting
and click on the links. Please let me know your opinions on the trello page. If some of you can easily pick up some lamps, please mention that as well.
I just added a NEW label (blue) to have a quick and dirty visual indicator for tasks that were added after a meeting and have not yet been discussed there (see SC_Design -> documentation concept).

If you find it useful use it :) if not we can skip it again.
we got good news from our friends at telekom. A techniker is coming tomorrow from 12:00 to 4:00!

So it looks good that everything is set up and we finally can work from our new place.
There's a relaxed hangout tonight I go to regularly and I thought I
might share it with you, I'd be happy to meet some of you there:

It's happening in Oppelner Straße 12 at Alelier Äuglein 8pm. ( for you,
who are not on facebook! )
I invited you to slack- a convenient chat thingy
 
It's not mandatory to use it (no important decisions only made there or something) but useful and fun.

if you missed the invitation, want another mail address to be invited  or have another question- - tell me.
we now have an established internet connection. Access data is on the bottom of the router until we change the ssid and password.
awesome! So that means we have a house phone number as well? Some of us yesterday had the brainwave that once we have the internet/phone, those without keys can call to see who's at the space. do we already have a phone?
Has there been discussion of when the space will be open later on today? Have plans to walk a few loads over with Phoebe between 5-7 (I believe she gets off work around 4). Would love to know when the space plans to be open so we can try our best to come by then. Thanks!
not sure if you got my groupmail, i didnt.

the transporter is fully packed and at lacuna soon.
if you have time and can be here kindof soon- please come around to unload it for its 2nd tour.

from the lacuna headquarter.
Hey, we are next on the list after arriving to lacuna so we need to stay
here to wait for them but if nobody else can make it i guess we can go
there and try to come back before they arrive to our place.
unfortunately NOW I got the message, that the desk can be taken from Neukölln today 1845 or later from Michael Karek, Hermannstr. 161, +49 177 3064400

I already sent a SMS to Wischi. If there is an evening tour, it would be nice, if you could take it from there. The desk can be used by anyone who likes to. Michael also offers some moving boxes if someone is interested. Please tell him/me if you like to drive there.

Can’t be there myself. Of course I will bring the desk another time, if it doesn’t fit your schedule today.
Nice find on the phone!

Just waiting at Fichtestraße 32 for the next tour, then will spent the early evening in the space helping people move, clean, etc.  Whatever needs doing.  :)
It's hard to see the chairs in those photos.
Are they chairs made of bamboo? We were thinking today of finding
chairs that can be easily stacked or folded for storage. Maybe from
one of those shops that sells material from renovating / closing
businesses.
I’ve just been at the space, awesome work with the toilet, thumbs up! 
Beautiful is maybe not the right word, but it looks pretty decent in white! :)

CAN’T WAIT TO USE IT.
thanks for the work!
Question: Have we figured out how to figure out who sits where yet …?

I might not be entirely up to date on this, because I’ve been out of town the weekend.

wischi brought a desk to the lab, but we have no idea how the final space allocation will be (so the orange standing desk in the Lift room is a suggestion, not a “claim” or anything).
had a discussion with Abe and the SC yesterday. I think the chairs might be fine as long we have too few. We can kick them out later, if we don’t like them anymore and have better stuff.

A friend wants to rent a „Robbe“ and bring the desk from Neukölln and the Conference table and the chairs from Prenzlauer Berg. For this I need a decision, if we want that stuff.

That could be an opportunity if anyone still has to move some things. I will tell you the date as soon as I know it.
the second key is still with the metal workers. Do we need the ladder for longer, or shall we return it?

Our Hausmeister Bernd just passed by and brought us two more keys.

Best regards and a nice and sunny afternoon.
It would be nice to use the ladder for putting up lighting. Would be nice if we could keep it at least till the end of this week, and then we might need to borrow it again...
I want to experiment with drawing and painting machines, but I would
rather build something myself. Here some inspiration (777 videos of
drawing machines!):
Things are developing nicely as some of us start to use the space and do some furnishing here and there. As a more concerted effort, Claudine is leading the installation of light fixtures tomorrow and our textiles experts, Nayeli and Sarah, will be going to the market to buy fabric and fittings for curtains in the main and end rooms. BUT they can't do it alone! Jump in on Trello here and here to coordinate with both projects.
A friend offers me this for 30€.

It's like what we are using, but a bit shorter.
6 steps instead of 8. It can be assembled in one
long piece, but that would not work in the middle
of the room, only for high walls.

What do you think?
Looking at similar models (3 x 6), they are 4.5 meters high. Our ceiling
is about 4.2. I thought it would not work, but the ceiling has metal
beams, and the ladder can rest on them, so I would say it's enough. I
guess we can try. We should pick it up near Kotti.
yes, I have a desk in Neukölln and a conference table + 8 chairs in Prenzlauer Berg. For the chairs and the table we haven’t decided yet, if we want it, so @all please tell me your opinion.
Wanted to send out an official invitation to join us this coming Monday evening 8pm for our very first Design & Publication subcommittee meeting. We'll start by inviting everyone to fill out their current + projected visions for the Lacuna brand. If you can't come and still want to share your thoughts, not to worry! Fill out the sheet attached and send back to us-we'll​ be sure to add your thoughts to the discussion. There are also several things to take a look at if you're so inclined on Trello (add comments if you have them to the Google pres re: positioning, vales, etc.)
Is it possible that you could save me a space somewhere in the big main or end room?  I don't have any desk or furniture to move in as yet to hold the spot and am swamped with work and lots of travel this month so its all a bit much.

Looking forward to seeing how the space has evolved!
Not sure who's around this weekend. Did you get your key so you can get in?

Anyway, there are tasks to "pick up". Replacing the toilet and tiling the toilet is a big job for multiple people. Still some work to be done on the toilet door (we need that 1cm x 5cm x 200cm piece and two simple door handles to complete this). Don't know if Claudine's doing any lighting this weekend or if Nayeli and Sarah are doing any curtains?

There are other things we need like small mattresses and more palettes to build couches for the lounge if people have those available.

Anyway, have a look on Trello.
after a long and productive meeting yesterday the SC_Design & Identity group decided to go for its own trello board due to the the huge amount of work and tasks that have to be handled here in the next future. Feel free to join the discussion there. The old SC list on the main trello board will remain there to give a short overview of what is being worked on at the SC board. See the results of our brandstorm here. If you want to contribute your vision as well do it there (with the help of the brandstorm sheet given to you in our previous mail).

You can also now follow the meeting notes of the SC on a separate hackpad.
This week started the School of Machines, Making and Make Believe
(http://schoolofma.org). I'm one of the main instructors in this 10 week
program, so I'll be at NK most mornings.

I also haven't managed to finish the web project, and for some reason,
our Telekom internet connection does not allow me to log into the
project server, so I'm working at home. Arturo and I already had issues
accessing our mail servers, and that was fixed. Since the project is
very urgent now and I don't know how long it would take to fix this
issue, I'm finishing the project at home.

I'll be back soon!
who is the owner of the projector and can we use it for movie screenings? We think about starting our first meeting on June 17 with a cyborg movie. Of course Lacuna Lab members can attend, too, but we haven’t decided about the movie yet.

Best, Enno

Copyright warning: Whenever you plan to watch movies on the projector it always has to be non-public. Never put an public announcement on a website or facebook and tell people that a movie and which one is shown. German copyright laws even don’t care about taking no admission fee. But of course there can be guests who doesn’t need to be member of Lacuna Lab or Cyborgs e.V. just like you can have guests in your living room. And  you can announce a meeting without telling that a movie is shown.
Yes, thank you so much to the toilet and tile replacement crew!  The bathroom looks amazing, almost unrecognisable from when we first moved in!   Awesome work!!! 
Greetings from the Northern Wilds of Wisconsin, USA!

Writing this email has been on my mind for a while, since I wanted to congratulate us all on bringing our space to life.

We did it!

Lacuna Lab is now a living, breathing entity, and I can't wait to see how it starts to grow up!

It was definitely difficult for me to have to leave for vacation right after move-in, but it's been good to unplug and reflect on what we've accomplished over the past six months.  I've actually ended up extending my time in the US, and won't be back in Berlin until 22 June.  After relaxing and spending some time with family, I'm already feeling re-energized to come back and help Lacuna enter its adolescence. :)

Growing Pains

I imagine we are now in a sort of "growing pains" period, as we jostle for position and decide how to use each part of the studio.  I know Rin, Jem, and others have already expressed concerns about reserving personal space.  It's been an ongoing question the entire time we've had the studio, and it's one that we couldn't answer effectively until we got everyone's desks and equipment physically inside.

I've been hoping that we can avoid being too prescriptive about this.  That is, I would prefer not to have mandates like "each full-time member is allowed 10qm for personal belongings, blah blah blah..."

We should all just remember that we volunteered to join this boat together, and so should maintain an attitude of mutual respect and open-mindedness as we shuffle furniture around (since it's unlikely we'll get everything perfect on the first try).

I encourage everyone to voice their concerns and desires for the space either via email or the Trello boards, so that we can be sure to optimize for everyone who has helped make the dream of Lacuna a reality.

One point in particular I noticed people talking about after move-in is that many of us would like to maintain access to the "roof patio" through the Lift Room window, since it is a very nice and unique benefit to the space, particularly during these lovely summer months.  I'm sure we can work out a configuration that is beneficial for everyone there.

The Next Milestones

So hopefully everyone is getting nicely settled and making the space feel like home.  :)

Major kudos to Thomas and Alex (and anyone else who was involved in the project) for upgrading the bathroom.  It looks brand new!  I have to second aBe's comment, that this probably the most excited I've ever been about a toilet. :P

I hope people are thinking about the next improvements they'd like to see in the space (like kitchen seating?), and also about the internal and external activation parties!  The amazing work we've all done deserves to be celebrated, first amongst ourselves, and then with Berlin at large!  Let's start considering how we'd like to demonstrate the values of Lacuna to the world.

That's all for now--time to go soak up some sun with the brother I haven't seen in almost three years.
The projector belongs to me, and you are welcome to use it!  I ask only that you treat it with care, and please return it to its case and hiding spot when you're done.

And don't forget to put your event on the shared Lacuna calendar so people can be aware of when the space will be in use!

Thanks for the note about copyright--definitely important for us all to keep in mind as we make event announcements, so we can stay on the right side of the law.  :)
Today I wanted to invite a friend of mine to join tomorrows' cyborgs meeting. I was pretty surprised when he reinvited me to the same event location for his lecture series on non-human subjectives.

After talking to some members of Lacuna it seems as noboby knows what's going on. This is problematic in a few ways.

The space is still under construction. This means we aren't really prepaired for public events. There are no lockers or anything like that where people can lock there stuff. There is also still a lot of construction waste and work left. Additionally we do not have enough chairs for bigger groups.

In general there is nothing wrong about having events in the space organized by cyborgs e.V. but people have to be informed in adcance to be prepaired.

I for myself thought the current meeting was a cyborgs members only meeting. It was not transparent to me that there might be 30 or 40 people in the space on Wednesday.

It's not about cancelling the current meeting but about a better communication. And please keep in mind that the space has not even been opened for public events ;)

Good luck with tomorrows meeting anyway & all Lacunas members don't forget to prepair!
for normal, our meetings seldom have more then 10 attendees, mostly fewer. It’s a member meeting but announced on our website for people who want to get in touch with us. For normal 1-2 guests (or future members) show up. I really would be very surprised, if it would get bigger. We also had bigger events when we invite known people like Tim Cannon, but there isn’t any such event planned. Let’s see how it works out tomorrow and discuss it then, ok?
I don't have a lot of time to jot off anything but a quick email right now, but I wanted to at least say that I second Thomas' concerns.

Lacuna Lab is a shared resource, and effective use of it necessitates mutual respect and communication.  The space is, first and foremost, Lacuna.  No one member has any more rights to it than any other.  That is to say, intended usage of the space should be clearly communicated well in advance to all other members.

As I mentioned in my last email, we are still in the process of activating the space, and until all internal members are comfortable with the current state of our rooms and equipment, inviting the public into our space without clear communication is disrespectful and, especially given our current lack of insurance coverage, potentially dangerous.

Apologies in advance if I am in any misinterpreting the emails, as there is only so much insight I can have from the other side of the planet.

My only wish is to ensure that our association maintains a healthy culture of comfort and mutual respect, especially in these early days, as that culture will determine the success or failure of our dreams for the studio.
since you seem to be Lacuna's resident night owl, was just wondering if you are at lacuna tonight. I'm just considering whether to stop by on my way from the airport with my bag o foam mattress and curtains. thanks!
The chair situation has not changed. I guess we could have a few more
around the large table in the open space.

Things in my mind about tomorrow:

Are there preparations needed?

We have standing wood pieces that can fall, paint buckets,
construction stuff and tools laying around.

We have no drinks (only tap water).

There's cables that may be unsafe, for instance one next to the main
entrance. We could tape it for tomorrow.

I made the elevator door lockable. Not safe against "determined
adversaries", but works otherwise.

We don't have any instructions yet for events, but obviously the place
should be left in the same condition as before (including the
toilette), no smoking, guests should use the freifunk connection, not
the Lacuna one (I haven't tested if the freifunk connection works).

We don't have curtains to block light, so projecting at early hours
won't work very well. I'm not sure we have speakers.

Anything else I'm forgetting?

Even if things are not so ready I hope it's a great event tomorrow!
The owner told me we could go tomorrow between 10 and 12 in the morning
to pick it up, or between 4 and 5 pm.

Anyone up for that? A 1 km walk with a big piece of wood?

We could write something in it to greet people in the street 
I brought some stuff to the pad tonight - because of the coolio cyborg talk I couldn't just plop stuff in the places I wanted to, so just a heads up over email.

I brought a stack of curtains which are currently in the kitchen. Feel free to take and use what you want. Plus I brought more kitchen towels. 

I also brought over a foam mattress - I figured it might be useable for the pallet couch if we make that. It's currently in the huge red luggage.
It was very nice to see so many people today watching a presentation
about cyborgs and discussing at Lacuna Lab. It was a strange feeling
too. I was wondering how is it to come to this place for an hour or two,
without knowing anything about all the work that has gone into making it
possible 
I agree. It was a really nice and interesting meeting. Everyone was kind to each other and respectful to the space. All the stuff that was used should be back in place more or less.

This feels like another step into the right direction.

Thanks for sharing the pics aBe!
me and rin are in lacuna. we only borrowed the space keys from alex so have to get out of the area around 10? somebody knows something about the house, area opening times or can come around with a key?

do we have a doc for keyholders? its good to know who has the house/area keys, no?
Yes, a doc or whatever is handiest for everyone to know who the current key holders are, what their "normal" hours are and how they can be contacted  is needed. If you have want to set it up? :)

To my knowledge it's:
aBe
Arturo - early bird
Marcel - night owl
Metalworkers as insurance for their ladder (we will probably give the ladder back, and get our key back, when we finish hanging our lights so there's an incentive to finish that)

Sounds like you might need one too, Ramin? Anyone else had trouble getting access? There's a Trello card for that :)
leider konnte ich Dich telefonisch nicht erreichen.

 

Erst einmal wünsche ich Dir alles erdenklich Gute zum Geburtstag und feiere schön!!

 

Die Rhion Versicherung hat zur Vereinshaftpflichtversicherung bzgl. der Veranstaltungen noch die unten genannten

Fragen (ggf. müsste ansonsten für Veranstaltungen jeweils eine Haftpflichtversicherung abgeschlossen werden).

Das Angebot zur Inhaltsversicherung habe ich dann heute morgen auch noch erhalten (siehe Anhänge). Trotz der Nachlässe halte ich die Prämie (liegt u.a. wohl an der Einstufung als Vereinsheim) für recht hoch; ich müsste also nachverhandeln (geht aber erst, wenn die Sicherungsbeschreibung vorliegt) oder werde den Vorgang nächste Woche bei anderen Gewerbeversicherern über einen Maklerpool ausschreiben.
Meant to say a big thank you for this. I did a prototype curtain wire that needs to be replaced. I bought proper curtain hooks. Can do it next week or whatever. Also made a first attempt couch with your foam mattress up in the loft. It's too high now but we just remove a palette or two for maximum relaxation pose.
for the room where we are we bought a plastic tube at bauhaus, it's
meant to be used to pass wires through it but it works well for the
curtains if they are not very heavy. It's 2€ for 2m and you can join one
after another if you need something longer.
Joana Moll - http://janavirgin.com/, an artist and activist from
Barcelona who was teaching at the School of Machines, Making and Make
Believe (where I teach for 10 weeks), saw our studio during her visit to
Berlin.

She liked it very much and asked if there's any chance she could work
with us during August and part of September.

She would need a chair and a place for her laptop. She's really nice and
friendly.

Should we discuss in a meeting if we are open to temporary members?
I guess over the next week things will happen with the overhead lighting, so if you have your own ideas of how this should be done but haven't checked out that card, please read what's happening on the Trello

The way I see it, it's not necessarily going to be the perfect lighting solution, but it will be a lighting solution, a solution you can build on or alter as you wish in the future. Also, we will also have floor and desk lighting. Bear in mind the cost of all the lamps have come out of my own pocket. Since all of this is a volunteer effort we vote with our feet so to speak. If you have some awesome idea to make a lamp out of cups, great, please do it. And please add it to the Trello. 

Let's get something up so we can return the ladder to our neighbors. We need a case of beer - who's in charge of that?
since we all have to work for money from time to time I thought I ask around:

Is there anyone with descent knowledge and references in web based interactive product presentations in WebGL or similar techniques?

I would need a link to a webpage with some past projects and a short description about you and your skills.

There is a good possibility to work on a project for this Munich based agency.
But since I've been working non stop since January,
I'll take time off until September. Anyway I'm still
teaching in Potsdam and at the School of Ma,
so it's not really vacation 
I think something we do need to address as soon as possible (in the next meeting perhaps?) is whether we will be taking on new members, and if so when, part-time or full-time, short-term (residencies) etc.  Because there are a lot of great people we have the opportunity to bring into the space, but it’s all very unclear where things stand on that for the moment.
I’m not sure if you got more responses than just Marcel (perhaps he was the only response that was cc’ed to the whole group?), but if you still can, please do go ahead with getting these chairs! Everyone in Lacuna that I’ve discussed it with so far has given it a thumbs-up. 
Too bad ... I thought I had sent you an email as well, but it seems I didn't ... Anyway, in terms we can wish for something :) I think we should have chairs similar to those in the attachment. They are much easier to store and use a lot less space.
I had the impression that the ones initially offered were of better
quality and more comfortable than the ones in the picture. I'm not sure
I'd like to sit 7 hours (duration of a Jam) in one of them. Do you think
it would work?
Hope you have all been happily working away.
I am finally back in Berlin (for a few days) and I have some showings of my work coming up this week if you are interested.

Thursday evening is the grand farewell for Supermarkt - an events and coworking space on Brunnenstrasse - with an audio visual performance from Peter Kirn and I.
An impromptu offering. Sarah asked if Joa and I could hold a short performance/open rehearsal of our Jazz duo in Lacuna tomorrow at around 15h. It's about 30 minutes of music. Guitar and singing. Relaxed stuff. We could close the door to the lift room to minimise disturbance if needed. But if it's too much of an intrusion generally, just let me know. It was just a nice spontaneous idea.
Just wanted to send a quick note to say I've been missing seeing everyone in the space! Although I'm in Berlin, I expect to be busy through August due to School of Ma. If there are any prospective additions needing a desk space for this period, please connect them with me and we can discuss an arrangement!

Hope to run into you all here and there,
Turns out we were too spontaneous even for ourselves: We're actually too busy to do the open rehearsal today. But we can do it on Sunday at 4pm as long as that doesn't clash with any other plans and doesn't disturb anyone. Let me know if there's any problem.
Yeah, new members is sounding like something we should discuss at the next all-hands meeting, which we're probably about due for, so we can discuss other things, including but not limited to:

    how are things going since move-in?
    lingering tasks to close out
    internal / external activation events!

It also sounds like, being summer, a lot of Lacunans are in and out of Berlin in the coming weeks.  I'd like to send out a Doodle to plan the next meeting, but it might be helpful if we could get a sense of when people will be around to attend: could people update the Google Calendar with their known upcoming travel dates, so we can rule out dates that are obviously suboptimal?

Loving hanging out in the space now that it's alive, and looking forward to seeing you all in the coming days!
Hey there, thanks Soma! Much appreciated.
I plan to be in Lacuna Saturday and Sunday morning and early afternoon (from 10 am onwards, till 4 pm?), I might come in tonight to continue to disconnect lamps from the rods.
The browser is still our favorite place to see art, so these five
Microgrants of $500 will be awarded to artists to create new
browser-based artworks.

This program is run as an open call. Submissions comprise a simple
150-word statement and a single sketch or image. Upon the close of the
open call, the proposals will be considered by a special jury, with five
Microgrants awarded.

Awardees will be announced in early August, and the resulting artworks
will be integrated into Rhizome's 2015-2016 program.
Yeah if we are going to go down the road of letting others "take over" our membership for a few months I would be interested in talking about options.
Unfortunately I haven't had time to get into the space and most of summer is looking like it will be like that :(
Hey, so I was a bit too ambitious with regards to when I would be at Lacuna - If I come today it would be after 4 pm.

I think the idea for the lighting is now well developed, so I invite you in the coming days to do something to help make it a reality, whether it is cutting cable lengths, or drilling holes in the ceiling.

Please check the Trello for details.
On Tuesday, right after Angelo got back from Hongkong/China, we pitched at an event for the accelerator of Deutsche Bahn. And we won a slot in their 3 month accelerator program! \o/ We already celebrated at Lacuna with some Sekt and Ramin, but we’re totally up for a second round of Sekt when more of you guys are around :).

Anyway, with the accelerator program come 3 months of free coworking at betahaus, which we don’t need but probably should use. So in July, August and September you might not see us at Lacuna that often during the day. But don’t worry – our office and our heart :) is still at Lacuna. We’d love to setup the hardware hacking corner soonish!

Feel free to have a Tsing tao on us, there are some in the fridge!
As aBe noted in another email, there is not much information on the work
we intend to develop during /Pala Fruits/ in the documentation I shared
with him. In a nutshell: we have been looking at an array of different
sensors (humidity, vibration, presence, movement...) as to pick up
changes in the environment and human interaction. The arduino would be
in turn connected to a computer running Ableton Live, transforming the
inputs of the various sensors into different audio broadcasts. Thus, for
example, triggering an audio response when the plant will be exposed to
human speech, in effect forming a sort of dialogue between it and the
person interacting. Among other things, I see this as an experience on
communication.
from July, 17th on I am searching for a reliable person who wants to live in my room for at least four weeks. The apartment is in Hermannstr. 233 in Neukölln. There are three more people living in. The room is 23 sq m, has a balcony, costs 320 Euro and is fully furnished. Contact me if you want to have more details.

Do you know anyone who is interested in renting my room?
Sure, I will suggest. :) To obtain a Lab key, we have to pay a 40 eur deposit that we get back when we return the key and we sign a contract. We could extend this contract to include a haus/hof key as well, and increase the deposit at minimum to the cost of cutting these haus/hof keys. Or simply draw up a completely new contract.
There were at least 2 keys, i think, at the beginning and then 3 more
that the landlord brought. the people who have those haven't had to pay
anything for them so it's probably more fair if we pay the keys among
everyone as Claudine says?

Whatever it is i would like to have one too, i don't mind either way but
let me know, i can bring you the money to the studio later in the
evening if you are going to be there.
@Claudine: I like the idea of updating the key holder agreement to account for Hof Keys, only thing is that not everyone wants a Hof Key so we probably still need two separate agreements and security deposits for each type of key.

@Wischi: I also considered that someone leaving the space could simply sell their Hof Key to a person joining (assuming that the leaving and joining coincide) but then considered that it's important that we keep track of who has each Hof Key for security, and in any case we need signed key agreements.

Generally regarding costs of key cutting, I would propose that this is a Lacuna expense, and that people need only pay security deposits. Which would mean we could a) consider all of the original €48 paid for the Lab key to be a security deposit that is refundable or b) already pay back the €8 and Soma (who originally paid for the cutting) files the key cutting as an expense.

@Arturo: Regarding the number of Hof keys. Yes, I remember this. So do we have 4, 5 or 6 Hof keys currently? And would the holders mind updating the Trello card and spreadsheet so we know.

@Marcel: Thanks a million for sorting out the permission for new Hof keys!
How to do all this: I think the members that spend time in Lacuna should decide who gets to be temporary resident. So not AirBNB-Style the person who isn't there rents out their place. I'd rather compare it to a flatshare where you say "Hey flatmates I'm gonna be gone for two months!" and then they decide who they want to share the flat with for the time you're gone. Of course you can suggest someone. Does that makes sense for you?
Odd that it's a slow process. When I made such insurance for home I did
the whole thing in an hour at Dresdner Bank, and they didn't ask for so
many details.

That window was broken already when we moved in. We accepted the space
as it was so I wonder why would Tækker want to do anything about it now.
Just a reminder that we're gathering at the space today to catch up on status of things and figuring out next steps for various projects (logo, lighting, etc...).

And at 19:30 we've got an all-hands meeting to review our progress and vote on remaining action items and catch everyone up.

Come on by when you can!
Thanks to Thomas and Alex for returning the loaned ladder back downstairs with beer. We still have need for a ladder for renovations, and I think it would come in handy in the future for whenever we set up installations, and so it would make sense for us to invest in one ourselves. Soma said he scoped out a baumarkt and saw one for about 100 EUR. Chances are we will have access to a vehicle on Thursday and could easily buy and transport a ladder to Lacuna at that time. So, what do you all think about this? 

I did not add this to the Trello voting board because last night we decided what we vote on, and it did not include purchases like this.
Thanks for the initiative. Dunno, I think while we are in renovation mode, wood is still useful - we might want to build under counter shelves, more tables, maybe the wood is good for art projects. I think the wood is small enough to put outside ourselves, without bringing it to a waste center. 
It still available!

I think 80€ is a good price, it was about 3 times more expensive in the
shop I believe.

It's about 15 minute walk to Reuterplatz, in case 2 people want to carry
it by foot. I have back pain today 

Or if we are going to pick it up by car (does it fit?) we should call
the person today and say when we will be there.
noticed too late. The ad is now gone. We have a paper with the name,
object, price, date. I could print the e-mail in which I asked if it was
available and he replied, but it does not include the price.
A friend of mine that is also an animator, may be interested in join us too.
I was planning to talk about it on the meeting on sunday, but at the end we couldn't make it.
Should I put his name on the waiting list in trello?
Yeah, we could do that. I think in an ideal situation, we'd have another Lacuna Swing soon to make the furniture in the common areas that would be made out of this wood - I mainly am thinking about under counter shelves, and maybe we could make a nice office supplies and printer area. Then whatever is left is for art projects, and we can give people a week to pull out wood they want to use, and then the rest is dumped.
What can be done so this never happens again?
Big sign on the door? With a check list, like on airplanes?

When I've left I've closed windows, switched off all the power strips to
avoid useless power consumption, turned off the lights and fans and
locked the door. Should we write those on a big paper?

Also make sure the fridge door is closed. It wasn't a few days ago.

One more: someone left the elevator unlocked. That means that anyone
could enter through the elevator. There's a lock at the bottom of the
elevator door which must be inserted down so the door can't be opened
from the outside. It's hard to lock it, but it's doable.
Happy Summer!  Hope you're out enjoying the fact that the sun is back for a bit.

It's been a while since we've sent out a proper newsletter-type email, and there's plenty to talk about, so let's get started.

Lacuna Swing
On Sunday, 12 July, we had our first official Lacuna Swing event, where a bunch of us gathered around lunchtime and started picking random tasks to clean up and improve the space.

It was a great success!

Check out photos of the shelving we put up in the Main Room, and the new sitting area in the Kitchen.  We cleaned out a lot of the junk under the loft area as well.

It was a great chance for us to all work together and get the space that much closer to feeling "finished and furnished", so much so that we decided to have one every other Sunday to keep the ball rolling and get Lacuna from "beta" to "production ready".

Of course attendance is purely voluntary, but the more people we have, the more energy builds up, and the more we can get done (and there's still a few things to get done, like lighting, kitchen storage, shower cleanup...).

So I hope to see all of you at the next Lacuna Swing on Sunday, 26 July!


All-Hands
The evening of the Swing we also had an All-Hands meeting, where we discussed important topics, like the process for accepting new members to the space, some basic rules for the space, voting procedures, Satzung changes, and many others.

As always, you can catch up with the notes from the meeting here, and I definitely encourage those who weren't at the meeting to take a look.


Show + Tell
In addition to the Swing, we've been trying another recurring event out: a weekly show-and-tell every Monday evening at 19:30.  It's an opportunity to update other Lacunans about what you're working on, and get to know your fellow spacemates by sharing some pizza and a beer together.

You can check out who showed what at the Show + Tell Notes.

We also plan to use the show-and-tell as a way to introduce new members to the space (and vice versa).

And again, naturally not everyone will always be able to attend, but it's a great mechanism to keep the cultural heartbeat of Lacuna going, so do try to come by when you can, and don't be shy about sharing what you've been up to!


Open Windows
As Marcel mentioned yesterday, one of the windows was left open after everyone had left the space, which is a flagrant and avoidable danger to the well-being of our space.  As he also mentioned, we are not yet insured, so we would have ZERO recourse if any of our precious equipment went missing.

And even if we were insured, it's simply an unnecessary risk--the success or failure of our space is directly tied to how safe and comfortable people feel there.

So please, when leaving the space, think of your fellow Lacunans (and your own gear!) and make sure everything is in a consolidated state, just like the sign on the door suggests: Windows, Lights, Locks.


Lacuna Lab Lives!
On Tuesday, 13 July we hosted a field trip to Lacuna Lab for the students of the School of Making, Machines, and Make-Believe.  Check out a photo on the Lacuna Lab Twitter account.

And while aBe and I taught six School of Ma students how to connect their computers with Processing and OSC, the space was alive with creative pursuits: Nayeli was sewing her bags, Ramin was soldering for an upcoming children's workshop, Anaisa and Alex were working in the Porner Room, Thomas was prototyping an art installation in the Underloft...

It was really amazing to see our vision for a co-creation space come to life, a buzzing hive of artistry.  It warmed my heart.  :)


Internal Activation Party
And last, but obviously not least, our Internal Activation Party!

We've all done some amazing work together to transform the abandoned factory floor we initially rented into the space we share today, and I for one think that's something worth celebrating.

At the All-Hands we decided on a date: Friday, 31 July--two weeks from today!

The event is meant as an internal celebration of our efforts, and as such is intended more for Lacuna members than the general public, but don't let that keep you from inviting a few close friends who you think would appreciate how cool what we're doing is!

And this time, I promise, the sekt will flow.


Whew, that was a long one, but that's all for now.  Thanks for reading, and for making the dream of Lacuna a reality.

See you in the Space!
I'm sorry that I couldn't attend to the Lacuna Swing last Sunday, and also for next Sunday 26 gonna miss it cause I have to work. 
But I can help and contribute with energy from Monday to Saturday!
I just emailed Mark man with a van, and he said he could help transport Ramin's couch and another armchair donation to Lacuna for 60 EUR - it would take about an hour. I don't know if the Lacuna bank thinks this is a worthwhile use of Lacuna funds or not, but what do you think? I don't know how much in advance one has to reserve a Robben and Wientjes van; Mark could do this job next week. Might be nice to have the couch in the space in time for the internal activation party.
Even tho, shapewise it fits quite okay in the kitchen area at the moment the vote has decided that it should serve in another space.

Nobody I asked was sure who brought it in. Maybe this person can now again decide where to take it. If its not for use for you, we would help to put it into the wild.
Maybe it is better to keep temporary things if they can serve a purpose until something better replaces it? I'm fine with replacing the grey thing, but until you find a nice free wooden cabinet on the street, the one we have now is more helpful than leaving stacks of paper out in the open, oder? Unless people are already working on a kitchen cabinet replacement - is this happening?
Just wanted to make sure that everyone is aware, I am using the large room at Lacuna for a dance rehearsal tomorrow, Thursday the 30th from 10am-1pm.  It has been on the calendar for a long time, but I’m not sure if everyone checks there very regularly.  

I’m hoping that holding it in the morning/early afternoon will be easiest to not interfere with other people’s use of the space (things are usually pretty quiet in there on weekday mornings.)   We are working in the main large room, but of course the side rooms with doors on them are still free for people to come in and work.  If you plan to be there and working in the End room connected to the large one, I’d just ask that you try to be fairly quiet and respectful while we rehearse. 
Claudine I think when we leave, we might put it full with stuff until we are to lazy to remove it. but okay- maybe there will be enough force, if we find something better. 
So lets seek out . and when we find something it can be turned into a sticker collector in the stairway or something
I just bought a couple of these wooden boxes (like the ones in the kitchen that Claudine brought in) from Bauhaus.  They're not overly expensive, and very modular, and there are some drawer inserts you can buy as well (check out my newly organized area in the corner of the End Area to see what they look like in person).

Perhaps we could use some Lacuna funds to buy a few more of those to make up for the storage space we would lose by tossing the grey wardrobe?
Just a quick note reminding you of the 🎊Activation Party🎊 at Lacuna this Friday!

There's no real plan beyond music, drinks, food, and friends--bring any ideas you think would be fun!

We can plan to get started around 19:00, but I'm sure some of us will be hanging around the space before then.

On the topic of food: there's been talk of doing a potluck, so if you can, bring some food to share.  We could also arrange a mass pizza delivery or something similar--let me know your opinion and I can organize that.

We've got a pretty awesome space going here, and I'm excited to celebrate it with everyone who helped make it possible.
In my desk there's a number of a guy who would deliver drinks.
I don't know if he can do same-day delivery...

If someone calls him, it would be good to mention that we are 18 people
and plan to host weekly events, so he knows it's not just a one time thing.

If not we can just go to Netto or Getränke Hoffmann...
Well, I think we can say that was a roaring success. Food was super tasty, playlist was perfect, thanks, Soma, lots of lovely people hanging out, only beer spillages were done by our own members (you know who you are), one case of a member being attacked by an art piece, and we are still definitely, without a doubt a non-profit!

On thy last point, could the peeps who are out of pocket let us know what the damage is so we can transfer some money to you to share the cost of the drinks. Next time we can take turns running the bar. Make it more official-like.
I would maybe get those boxes without drawers (the drawers cost 30€).
As drawers we can find a nice metal box in the flea market.

Or wet get lucky and find something nice on the street or online.
Or build a nice artsy irregular wood closet thing with wood pieces.
I am going to show Lacuna to a Rama, she works for Autodesk and she oversees Brand Partnerships for Autodesk an new ways to creatively collaborate in a meaningful way that will be mutually beneficial. As part of that endeavor, I am conducting a listening tour in the UK and Germany to connect with some of the great innovators and organizations focused on design and the future.

Does anybody interested in joining the meeting? What about if we do a show and tell for her with sessions like the Show and tell of monday? Any ideas?
I'm interested, though would love to better understand what I'm signing up for my interest for:) Sounds like this could just serve as an informative meeting to share what we're capable of and that we wouldn't necessarily need to prepare any proposals, but depends on what kinds of partnerships and for what timeline she might be looking for (i.e. Project proposals, talent scouting to join existing projects and collaborations, hosting sponsored events or workshops, etc).
As i told during last weeks show and tell we are going to meet this
sunday, I've just added it to the trello calendar.

We are going to be working on trying to get ready the first release
candidate of the next OF release, 0.9. Will be mostly fixing bugs but
there's also some documentation and install guides for the new supported
platform (OF for the web) to write.

We'll be there from 10 in case anyone wants to join.
I've mentioned this to a few of you, but wanted to send an official email as well. I have an architect friend visiting tomorrow through the 16th, and would like to let him use my desk to focus on his thesis/a workshop we're planing for the next few days as I'm busy here at School of Ma preparing for this upcoming show. As I haven't been there to use my desk, I had arranged with Johanna who is visiting to borrow my desk space for her time at Lacuna, so that would mean the desk behind (previously Phoebe's). I know it has been up for grabs and used by a couple of people, but hoping it's cool to reserve back a space for just these few days. His name is Arnaud, and he works at WOMA, a Fab Lab in Paris (there have been talks of organizing an exchange program:).
Tomorrow is gonna be the hottest day of these days heat wave. School is over the weekend is close. let's refresh our heads in the cool of a nice and clean lake.

I propose two options. 
We've just noticed that tomorrow we have both the Cyborgs meeting and the weekly Show + Tell scheduled.

Rather than consider this a "conflict", I thought perhaps we could try combining the two meetings, so our two associations could get to know one another better: Lacunans could go around and show examples of what we do, and the Cyborgs could talk about what interests and motivates them.

And who knows--maybe we'll come up with some brilliant cyborg/creative coding hybrid project ideas!

Let us know what you think (Enno, in particular).  Is resistance futile?
We’re going to have a talk with discussion at 8pm as I already invited you. I couldn’t reschedule that because of a guest speaker but we surely can (and will traditionally) start later. I understand it this way: Show and Tell will be all over the space and the talk will be a part of it in the main area, where attends who likes to.

I hope, that’s fine for everyone?
I’m not at all amused that today again I must stick to my office due to some urgent and important TODOs. I don’t know if or when I’ll manage to show up this evening. Please stick for our cryonics talk to Stefan Greiner who will be there and moderate it.
If we do have someone for such short time, would it make sense to have a
slightly higher price, like 50€? because the paperwork and time to
organize things is the same for us, no matter if it's one week or one month.

But do we want to have people just for a week or two?

I have the impression that in such a short time there's no time for a
meaningful exchange between Lacuna and that person (maybe many members
would not even meet that person during the time), and sounds close to
the kind of service provided by a co-working space.

Mmm... except if they are known friends, in which case they are already
connected to Lacuna through our members, and a short visit can make
sense  When you first asked I imagined someone random asking for a
desk for one week...
Yeah, in this particular case I'm talking about Kurt Strong from School of MA last year. Personally, I've been looking for opportunities to work with him since last year but he lives in New Zealand usually so it's hard to get something rolling. Anyway, he has an option to come over for a week and hang out / work with us. He has lots of fun ideas, all-round nice guy, all that shit.

BTW the context I'm going by regarding "Shorter rent period[s]" is the July All Hands
I think Abe's idea of charging a little more to cover all the admin related to short term visits is a good idea. 
In general not opposed to visiting artists for a week or two but is nice if they have some connection to the space  or something to offer.

Perhaps we could ask that all short term people present something at show and tell so we can get to know them and their work?
Yeah I also agree not to turn it into a coworking space and that anyone visiting for a month should be a close friend / collaborator of a permanent member. Would also agree that up to a week rent free is fine. Should we try it out this time and see if it works for us? Anyone opposed / has an alternative suggestion?
as the adults are gone, is anyone up for celebrating our freedom in a good old home alone manner with video games and pizza and trapping the house and/or beers on the terrace or something, one of the next days?
I am leaving to brazil for a time (don't know how long) . It will be good to say goodbye to you all! it was a marvelous time together and lets keep in touch for future projects that might come.. :)

I left a cardboard box with materials, feel free to take them. 
Im also leaving the blue neons: make a logo with that! it will look amazing!

I am also selling my bike for 50 euros. image in annex. if someone is interested let me know. Its in Lacuna in the afternoon.

Also, If someone is interested to buy the LED Ball from taiwan for 50 euros, let me know!

Hope to see you around today!
Just dropping a quick email in search of the key to aBe's flat, which was dropped off at Lacuna earlier this week.

All we know is that "a colleague" received the key when it was dropped off at the space, and I'm going to need it when I get back to Berlin tomorrow afternoon--does anyone know what might have happened to it?

Thanks, and greetings from Mallorca!
Did you know that today marks the three-month anniversary of our move-in to the space? It's true--our collective is now officially 0.25 years old!

And that makes the time seem about ripe for another newsletter, so strap on your reading pants and let's get this thing going.
Arrivals / Departures

There's been a couple changes to the Lacuna lineup lately:

First, we bid adieu to Anaisa, who is returning her homeland of Brazil for the foreseeable future. Safe travels Anaisa!

Next, most you have probably already met Joana Moll, but she never got a proper email introduction, so: Welcome Joana! She's just joined our family for the month, and will be returning to Barcelona on 7 Sept, but we might have convinced her to come back later this year. So if you don't get to say Hi before she leaves, just pester her to return in October. :)

And last but not least, welcome Nenad "Nesa" Popov, who just joined us this week as a one-month trial member. Some of you may already know him from his work with the Science Hack Lab and Creative Coding Jam, and we have actually had an image of his work hanging in the kitchen for a while (the "How Can We All Make It To The Future?" poster). He's currently sharing the black table with Ramin in the main room, so drop by, say hi, and ask him about the cool stuff he's working on!
Alternating Mondays

Some people have raised the opinion that having a Show + Tell every Monday might be a bit too frequent, and proposed changing the structure a bit. So we're going to give that a try: we'll still meet every Monday, but alternate the purpose of the meeting each week between a Show + Tell and a Sub-Committee meeting.

The idea behind this new structure is that will it give us all a little more time between Show + Tells to amass something interesting to show, and it will also give a regular cadence to the Sub-Committee meetings, which should help us close out our administrative tasks a bit more efficiently and help get Lacuna to the next stage in its glorious evolution.

The calendar has been updated to reflect this, and we'll start with the Show + Tell tomorrow. Nenad, if you'are able to attend tomorrow, maybe you could prepare a little something to introduce yourself to the group?

And please, as always, if you have opinions one way or the other on this change, voice them on this Trello card!
External Ausstellung

Speaking of Lacuna's glorious evolution, we've been planning since our founding to have both an Internal and an External Activation, announcing our existence to the world. We had a pretty fantastically successful Internal Activation Party (which, incidentally, happened on our two-month anniversary, or Lacuna's 0.166...th birthday), but we still don't have any concrete plans for an External one, so let's start that conversation.

The dream was that we could have the External Activation take the form of a collective exhibition (or Ausstellung, for the German and German-wannabes among you), and we had initially thought that we could host such an Ausstellung at Lacuna itself. However, as things have moved along, and we have turned the space into our atelier and home, it seems less and less appropriate (and secure) to have such a public event there. Additionally we have friends at Spektrum and PLU41 who are excited to offer their spaces to us, both of which are much more conducive to an exhibition.

Spektrum, as most of you probably already know, is geared toward art/technology projects and presentations, with events running only a single night. PLU41 is another space also focusing on the intersection of art and technology, but their format is closer to a traditional art gallery's, with exhibitions running for a couple weeks or more.  Thomas has been in contact with them, and they are curious about our collective and interested in exhibition proposals.

So, all that to say, we have two great places in the neighbourhood where we can exhibit; the next question is, what do we show? Maybe you have some project ideas you've been waiting for an excuse to start?

Let's start the conversation about what and how we'd like to present Lacuna to the world through our first exhibition here, which will be a one-night event at Spektrum. After the ideas are a bit more solidified, we can talk to Spektrum about our proposal and set a concrete deadline.

And after that's a success, we can talk about putting up something longer-term at PLU41!
Lacuna on Vimeo + Tumblr

Lacuna Lab also now has Tumblr and Vimeo accounts, where we can show off experiments and works-in-progress from our space. The Tumblr is already getting a surprising amount of attention for being so young (turns out Tumblr is a good platform for exposure).

Let us know if you have something you've been working on that you'd like to share!
Happy Birthday to Sarah

Since it is now after midnight, it is officially her birthday and no longer bad luck in Germany to do so: let's wish Sarah a Happy Birthday!

Thanks for inviting us to your garden party tonight, Sarah! I've uploaded a few pictures to OwnCloud--let me know if you have any trouble viewing them.

Also, let aBe know if you would like access to OwnCloud and don't have it yet. I think it can be a great place for us to collect all the photos we take of our activities in and around Lacuna.
Last Words

I think that's all the news for now, which is probably enough--I know these emails will be long when I start them, and they still end up even longer than I expect. If you've made it this far, thanks for sticking with me, and you can claim your complimentary cookie by telling me the secret words "verbose Vorsitzender" next time you see me in person.*

As always, I want to thank you all for helping making Lacuna the community it has become--it's all about having the right people, and we certainly have them. Four months ago, this place was a dark and dingy cave, and now it's a flourishing garden of art, ideas, and interactions (and tomatoes). I look forward to where our journey takes us next.

Hope you all enjoy the remaining days of summer, and I'll see you around the space!
I got to know masahiro at ramin's birthday party. He is the inventor of a brainwave interface, which allows you to use your brainwave to manipulate whatever you can imagine. I am keen on seeing his interface in action and am wondering if any of you are interested as well? 

He will be back to new york on 11th September, so maybe we can use next Monday evening (i know there is no show-and-tell) to have him over for a short demo? Drop me a line if you are interested, so that I can make sure the date works for everybody (or just me) :)
As most of you know I'm leaving next monday, back to this touristic apocalyptic paradigm called Barcelona ;) (there's still good food and the beer is not that bad... so come visit!)

I'd really like to have a goodbye party at Lacuna this saturday if everybody is ok with it, would love to see all of you there! BTW, Lacuna girls have 16€ free beers budget as a reward for our exhausting trip to the bottle cemetery last week ;)

So, what do you say?
Sure, please forward it to cyborgs! It's just that Masahiro decided to do the demo on creative stammtisch at co-up this Friday, would that work for cyborgs too?

ps. 2 people from lacuna just told me that they are interested but can't make it on Friday. And others worried that at stammtisch the demo can't be as in-depth. If it's the same for you, please let me know. So that there is a bigger chance for me to convince him to do another demo at Lacuna again :) (no guarantee tho)
we’re thinking about canceling our Cyborg meeting on Friday because of a conference/party at Netzpolitik.org and urge to discuss some things with people who will be there only.

So Monday would be cool. co-up is Adalbert-Str. 8 in Kreuzberg? And when do you plan to start on Monday?

I’d like to get in touch with Masahiro myself and would invite him to Lacuna when he’s in Berlin again.
So we're running with trying subcommittee check ins every second Monday (alternating with ShNT). It looks like the main committees in need of attention are admin&finance and design&identity. Shall we go for 19:30 -20:20 A&F and 20:30 - 21:20 D&A for today's check ins? Some of us are on both SCs so it's not possible to run them simultaneously. The format of the check ins can be mostly status updates and deciding on next actions to keep it brief.
Here's what was forwarded to a select group of us. I don't know why this particular selection was used. I'm with you on any information of this nature being readily available to anyone who wants it. I'm all for running things in any easy-going way but at the same time don't want to feel out of the loop. I actually thought aBe sent it to the entire mailing list until you mentioned it. Specifically on this point I'm moving for an Admissions subcommittee (please chime in here with your thoughts).

Do you have any objections to any of the things being said regarding Jerry joining for his 1 month trial? I was about to email him back with something like.
There are several organisational thing at the beginning indeed.

Basically next to signing a contract and adding you to the google group for group mail exchange, a hackpad, where we put some organisational and fun stuff and later a trello board.

the first month actually, I don't know if we mentioned that earlier is something like a trial period, to see if you like the atmosphere, can work here and try each other out.  You would get the after that time, when you become a permanent member. 
Regarding the place. It is a little chaotic, its okay, but some things need a rethinking. We also thought about a space in the room where thomas works- we call it the porner room- story later. simply because everything else is kindof set at the moment, before we make changes, which come at some point soon hope- especially regarding the room before that. 
I'm not sure tho, I think Aurelia was always sitting on the window place- not sure if she claims it or doesn't mind also regarding the furniture. She is still in San Francisco and will come back october I think.
You are also free to sit in the main room at the big table thats also cool. its like a free space.
It's simply that we need to trust someone before we give them keys to keep. However, during the day there is normally someone who can open the door, we have a phone that u can call to be sure. Sometimes  there also people staying late,  sometimes very late into the night.  In special cases you can ask someone to borrow u his/her keys. 
We need another general meeting for some important items. In particular, Lacuna is not insured, because the insurance company needs us to be a fully registered e.V., which we are not. To be a fully registered e.V. we need to amend our constitution/Satzung. To do the amendments we need to hold a general meeting. Phew!
Quick q. I'm in Paris working to make connections with WoMa and WOA, and there's interest in discussing opportunities for future collaborations with Lacuna. In the short-term, we're troubleshooting a couple of programs this week (today a 2-player game via raspeberry pi, and a simple LED thermometer later in the week). If anyone's free to lend some help on the code-advice side (possibly via skype), please send me a note:)
Unfortunately there still is no english translation. The new Satzung can be passed by a member meeting, but there should be a discussion if the members agree with Satzung, Finanzordnung und Laborordnung. I put the TODOs in Trello some time ago and have no overview if this had been discussed by now.
That shouldn't happen at all. Maybe they tried to use the "Telekom_FON" instead of "berlin.freifunk.net".

Also sorry for not checking and maintaining things I installed, when I'm not at Lacuna. I haven't been to Lacuna for like a month and if people give me a heads up when stuff is not working, I'm happy to fix it if my schedule permits.

If someone want's to have the password for the freifunk router or if we have a document for such information, no problem.
tonight a friend of mine and me will play a new audio-visual piece, it would be cool to see you there!
And if you are interested in any of the techniques used we can talk about them endlessly at Lacuna and maybe cook up something new together.
So: someone plugged the LAN Cable on the Freifunk Router into one of the yellow ports. Thats bad, because the traffic isn't routed through freifunk then but directly through our DSL Line. The cable needs to be in the blue socket.

It's fixed now. I unplugged the timer because: Timers draw 1-2 Watts all the time and the whole router draws approximately 2-3 Watts. So it doesn't really make sense financially. Also I believe freifunk is what should be used by everyone of our guests (simply for not having to do the whole "whats the password?" thing) and I'd would be kinda strange if it is switched of at 19:00. For example the Cybrog meetings happen after that. Also we share 10 MBit down and 2 MBit up maximum so there is enough bandwidth left even if neighbours use it as their primary internet access.
Just a quick reminder that the fortnightly subcommittees check in is tomorrow. Things on the list include finally translating our Satzung to English and getting updates about decisions regarding our VAT status. If you're on any of the committees see you tomorrow at 19:30. Starting with admin & finance like last time and probably more work on our website. We need designers for this BTW, otherwise we'll end up with a developer-looking site.
I won't be able to make the meeting tomorrow as I'm still out of town, but please keep me in the loop re: the website and how I can help. We have a good amount of progress on the design front : wires, logo, and a mockup V1. I'm happy to incorporate into an update and work with developers to integrate when I return (October 5), or before if I have time.
Thomas, do you by chance have access to the AI wireframe I had created on your computer a while back? Perhaps you could add along with your own mockups so our work so far could be integrated. If there starts to be a list of requested updates or specs, feel free to send my way - I'm happy to help update to a v2 wire/mockup if it's helpful.
Thanks for sharing, I agree with your comments. To be clear, the latest live link hans't been updated with my own or Thomas's thoughts (I believe Thomas has access to these files) from our previous wires/mockup as part of the Design subcommittee. I'm not able to contribute to the code, but am happy to discuss how I can be of help to evolve the wires I've already created with any updates after tomorrow's meeting/or with thoughts from Claudine and others who are working on the development side. Unfortunately, my computer was broken at the time so the design files are living on Thomas's computer, but he may have uploaded them to Trello or shared elsewhere. 
Yes, more live tomorrow, but regarding the vimeo thumbnails, I tried using vimeo's hubnut, which would have embedded videos, but that did not work for some reason. The other option is manually embedding video which I thought was too manual; the current thing automatically shows thumbnails of the latest 6 things on vimeo. I agree with you that it is best not to have to go to another website. In my ideal world, there would be an automatic feed of links which when clicked would react like when you click on photos in facebook. It would come to the fore, but you can also close it and return to the main page.

btw, the page you are viewing now is just one of several iterations - if you haven't already, maybe you should take a look at the iterations of versions to get a sense of everyone's aesthetic.

and as Seamus said, it's good to have the members page go to the hackpad so that he gets irritated enough to change it. If you don't like something, change it.
Please can we set up an all members meeting in order to get our train on track.

We like to get our Vereinsregistereintrag, steps might be:

Send an invitation to all members for Mitgliederhauptversammlung two weeks in advance.

Make and vote on changes of our Satzung.

This will include finding and electing a board to fullfill the requirements sent to us by Amtsgericht Charlottenburg.

On the same meeting we can decide about our VAT status and than set up a meeting with our tax consultant, recommended by Thomas and also show him the changes of the Satzung and ask if everything is fine. Our decision on the Vat status does not consider the Satzung.

Than we can forward it to our notary and led our Satzung be sent to Charlottenburg.
Of course, but problem is the files live on Thomas' computer - maybe you can ask him if he's around? I'm co-leading a workshop this week, but I will try to find time to search through to see if I can find a copy online somewhere if he's offline. If he's there, will be fastest to ask him.
In light of another break in occurring in an office the area (many MacBooks stolen), it's a bit worrying to find an unlocked window in Lacuna this morning...

Generally regarding security, does anyone have experience with alarm monitoring companies? We have a control panel and sensors so it should simply be a case of hiring a company to monitor everything.
Awesome, thanks Thomas. Btw, before we get the official versions, you can view the photoshop files with Gimp, and you can change the extension of the .ai file to .pdf and view it (since it was saved with pdf compatibility). just if you are impatient like me.
We had our subcommittee evening. Present were Thomas, Séamus, aBe, Claudine, Nayeli (briefly). We only did design & identity this time. We discussed the logo, website and social media. We worked on the about text for the site and on an animation of Claudine's.
Thanks for checking back about this:) I am still looking! Are you by chance interested? If not, could you help to collect an answer whether anyone at Lacuna is interested/available (deadline sometime to be agreed upon in October)? I'd like to give them a clear yes or no Tuesday or Wednesday this week so they can make plans accordingly.

It could be exciting for Lacuna-the first of what could be an ongoing series of projects between this fab lab/architecture studio in Paris (WoMa, WOA) doing fabrication, Lacuna the code, and both the concept co-design. 

It would be project collaboration rather than help-this first round involves coding a program for LEDs to light up based on one of three received images (I'm on the UX either way, but they're very interested to work with Lacuna on the realization if we are).
Thanks for the networking you are doing! Can you provide more context? I'm curious how you are in touch with these groups (they have gorgeous things on their website) - did you already have contacts there, or have you been working with them already, or... I'm also wondering what is the motivation for the projects you mentioned - the 2 person Raspberry game, and the LED thermometer? Dunno, maybe it would be more efficient to have a skype/google hangout chat today if you have time, especially if you need a decision so soon.
Sorry, I can't say anything new now and probably won't be able to do so for at least another one or two months. It's going to take a while until I really know, since I need to do further work on my portfolio, find job opportunities, need to apply for jobs, need to apply for a visa. Meanwhile I need to do other work too of course.

Realistically I think I'm not going to make it before the beginning of February (earliest)​. But that's just a guess …
How long in advance do you really need to know, when I'm exactly going to leave? Of course I will tell you as soon as I know!
It would be great if we could handle this rather open and without big promises on both sides. I'm sure we'll find a solution if there is a problem with overlapping of another person who wants to take my place.

And assuming the trial month goes well, I would of course like to come back after this trip (6-12 months).
The nature of a Satzung is in general not scary.
It is more an instrument to communicate the goals and purpose of an association. It explains why it is there and defines how it works.
It reflects the values of Lacuna Lab e.V and its members.
Today as we were leaving the robot exhibition in Spektrum, Alfredo suggested that the Lab do an exhibition. They are booked up through March 2016, and they do just one exhibition per month. So, the earliest we could book Spektrum would be April 2016. What say you? Talk amongst yourselves.
Thanks Alfredo for mentioned the idea of Lacuna Lab having our own exhibition - we've been talking about this as well, and we'd love to sign up for April 2016. Marcel, who is cc'ed, will be your contact regarding this.
The goal of the lab is to develop live audio-visual performances, to learn how to play with each other and to develop relevant technology(if it doesn't exist yet:)
The group is a nice mix of first timers and experienced collaborators, so it's a great place to get you started into live performances if you didn't dare to do it yet!
When the group feels like presenting stuff to the public, we will organize events. 

Tomorrow will be first hands on session, to be honest I expect it to be a bit chaotic because of all different cables/plugs people are using/missing - but it should settle down eventually.


If you are into performing live audio, visuals or audiovisuals it would be great to see you there!

If you think about joining, please email me with with kind of output you're using(hdmi/vga/computer output - small jack, xlr, ethernet whatever) so we can make sure we got you covered.
Just dropping a quick line to those of you who are on the edge of your seat wondering "when is Soma back in Europe?"  I was originally scheduled to leave today, but my trip has been extended by a bit, and I'm now planning to return to Berlin on 8 October, just in time for the All-hands Meeting. :)

I'm excited by the conversations about our first exhibition with Spektrum--can't wait to talk more about it in person!
Some of you have already heard I´m gonna get married this very Friday. I would like you to join us.

Here's our plan: At 11:30 in the morning we'll get married at Standesamt Neukölln in Blaschkoallee 32. If you want to come along to see the show better arrive some minutes earlier. The party will take place in Platzhaus Helmholzplatz on said Helmholzplatz in the barrio of Prenzlauer Berg. If you find the plaza you can't miss the house.  We'll be there from 5 p.m. on, doing some preparations. If you wanna give us a helping hand come along, there will be drinks already. ¡Real Starting Point will be around 7 p.m.!

To provide you and us with all the good stuff we need some help though. We're talking DRINKS and FOOD. Of course we will have drinks and some dishes there already but we'd highly appreciate your support in turning this night into a rather decadent one. So bring whatever comes to your mind.

Also feel free to bring some music (mp3) you want to shake them legs to to feed our playlist. That'd be great.
there was accidentally a FB page created which we cannot edit. I just made a new offical one. Everyone who wants to have admin access please let me know. Don't forget to change your profil info to address the new page if you are connected to the old (unoffical) one.
Some things for starting in Lacuna. I just invited you to our "Us" hackpad. That's our internal page for letting each other know about what we do and what collaborations we're looking for.

Let me know also if you can access our google calendar. This is where we write in our events and when we'll be away.

We'll get you on our internal mailing list (google group) soon too.
Just for anyone who didn't already know, Jerry (Jeremias Volker) started his one month of "let's try each other out" in Lacuna yesterday. If you haven't already read about him, here it is:

I’m working as freelancing Interaction and Computational designer since 1,5 years after finishing my studies in Interface Design at FH Potsdam.
Almost everything I do is simply spoken at the intersection of technology, code and design. There are two main field, that I currently like to work in. One is to create interactive installations for exhibitions, fairs, festivals and so on. Especially when working for exhibitions I like to be challenged by new topics in every project. Another is stage related work, which is mostly visuals or other show elements. Here I like the little thrill you get, while working in performances, never exactly knowing what happens. Technically seen, I worked a lot with Kinect and looked closer into Shaders as well as node based programming frameworks lately. And since I just started freelancing, I’m still quite open for many things.
The unfinished portfolio I share with my brother can be found here: soon.bloodbrothers.io
I was involved in almost everything which is not plain classic graphic design.

What do I expect from such a place?
I would like to find a warm, bright, welcoming and creative space, with friendly mix of people. Some of them should be working in the fields of design, art, code and electronics for direct exchange of knowledge. It would be nice to have more people there working in related fields like photography/film, product design, handicrafts, music and others. And ideally there would be space to built up and test installations and maybe a place to do some more dirty handicraft work.
I left the windows open, cuz it was hot- but forgot to remind you. 
You have to close the windows when you are the last to leave or when there are people in other rooms, close the windows in the rooms you were using.
Julie, a friend of mine, wants to shoot a video interview with me for self-publishing and job application. We would like to do that Tuesday, Oct 21 at 8pm in the Lab. Preliminarily I put that in the Lab calendar - the date was free. The shooting will last 60-90 minutes, no team, just Julie and me and the request for having the place quiet.
please don't forget to attend the meeting on Friday. It is a very important one! There are several things on the agenda that we have to talk about and decide on (e.g. changes to the Satzung).

I also called Taekker today. The Hausmeister is coming tomorrow between 11 am and 2 pm to fix the heating. Someone has to be there. Who can do this?
I've been updating our logo on our channels such as Vimeo and Twitter to our newly finalised one (thanks to Thomas) but I need log in details for Tumblr (they're not in Trello). I know Thomas also needs them for styling the Tumblr page. Who set that account up? I also switched the Vimeo account to use our gmail address for logging in so use that one.
I'm leaving my bike at lacuna until I'm coming back. Feel free to use it if u need :) the code for the locker is 2001. (I'm attaching a pic of the bike).

It's been great days, I was really happy to spend some time with all of u again, its quite sad to leave, but ill be back pretty soon and for longer time probably! 
Yes!  Very interested to get the conversation going on this.

Maybe people could chime in on the Trello card about any ideas for themes/projects/anything else relating to the exhibition, and that will give us some starting points.
My band Arlequino (experimental grooving hard rock) is going to release our first EP as soon as possible. I'm looking for some advice on how to reach potential listeners.

The EP itself will be released on Bandcamp and on a collector's USB card (see below). Our main promotion will be a short promotional video that we will share on facebook and other channels. This plays a short montage of the music over an animation with overlaid text directing the viewer to the website/Bandcamp (I'm making the animation with openFrameworks with post-processing probably done in Blender). The website will be simple with a p5.js element matching the animation in the video and a link to the Bandcamp page. 

So if anyone has any experience with promotion / reaching a target audience I'd love to hear some pointers.
we are currently making attempts to have a decent bookkeeping system for Lacuna. In this process, we are sending out invoices for the months that have already past. You should have paid these and, therefore, do not have to worry about them.
I'm planning to go bouldering tomorrow (Friday) around 6pm at www.boulderklub.de which is just around the corner of Lacuna!
You are very welcome to join me and probably a few others!

We do bouldering and sometimes rope climbing as well on kind of a regular basis. Usually every week and whenever somebody likes to go, which is usually Monday to Friday in the evening.
If anybody is interested in getting on the mailing list, just let me know!
I met Gene Kogan at the Sonic Code Session at Spektrum last week, and he
also came to the Stammtisch to share his work. Tomorrow is his last day
in Berlin before he flies back to NY.

I asked him to help us set up the tools so we can play with... "Style
transfer, a technique of recomposing images in the style of other
images... created using Justin Johnson's code based on the paper by
Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge demonstrating a method for restyling images
using convolutional neural networks."
Just a few bits and bobs for you...

FreeCAD Workshop
Those of you who were at the Show + Tell at the end of October may remember Michael Ang (a.k.a. Mang) talking about his Light Catchers project.

He has offered to teach a free workshop at Lacuna on getting started with FreeCAD, an open-source parametric 3D modeling software suite, which he used extensively in the making of his project.

We're thinking the first week of December.  Who all would be interested in attending?

The Joys of Steuer
Today aBe, Thomas, and I visited a Steuerberater specializing in e.V.'s to talk about how best to formulate our Satzung for Gemeinnützigkeit (charitable) status.  We also discussed different options for formulating the rates and/or membership fees at Lacuna Lab, and their tax implications for both the e.V. and its members.

It's all painfully exciting stuff, so I won't go into the gory details here, but we'll be sharing our findings soon in the form of an invitation to one final Satzung-changes meeting (I promise it will be more fun than the last one), so stay tuned!

School of Ma Interview
I recently did an interview with Rachel for the School of Machines, Making & Make-Believe about being an alumnus of her program and how it led to the founding of Lacuna Lab.  Check it out on the School of Ma blog!

That's all for now.  Don't forget about the meeting tomorrow at 7pm to chat about our first public exhibition!  And if we don't see you there, then maybe at Rin & Wischi's going-away drinks on Thursday, or at Mei-Fang's presentation at Scope Sessions, or at the Swing on Sunday!  (Wow, busy week.)
Thank you very much for your trust and making me a full member of the Lacuna. I'm really happy to be here and enjoy the space and you guys a lot (even if I look quite serious sometimes)!

Since yesterday I'm also proud owner of a Lacuna Lab key. But it looks like we ran out of keys for the building/gate. So next week I'm going to have more copies made.
Who else needs a key?

Please let me know by Sunday evening! Thanks.
Welcome Jerry!  Good to have you on-board!

And as you may have already found out, making copies of the Hof key requires written consent from Tækker, our landlord company.

In the past, Marcel got the necessary documentation for this, so maybe you can get the contact info from him.  It should be as simple as writing a letter and getting a response in the mail.
Wait, two wordy email blasts from Soma in one week?  He must really have something exciting to say...


External Activation Exhibition

As most of you are already aware, we had a great meeting last night to discuss our first public exhibition as a collective.

We brainstormed about potential project ideas, event formats, methods to facilitate collaboration, and, perhaps most excitingly, nailed down specific dates for the event!

Lacuna Lab's first public showing will be 22-24 April, at Spektrum!

We will also have 21 April available for setup and 25 April for teardown.

For those of you who couldn't make the meeting last night (or who did make the meeting, but need a refresher on what we said), check out this Hackpad.

As you'll (hopefully) see from the notes, in order to make the project ideas and theme of the exhibition more concrete, we tried to come at the discussion from two different angles: First, we went around and shared ideas we've been wanting to work on, to start conversations about potential collaborations.  Then, we approached from a higher-level, talking about possible overarching themes for the show that could guide our thinking as we formulate proposals.

Of course, both of these processes will be ongoing...


Creating Fertile Ground for Collaboration

Since part of the ethos of Lacuna Lab is to foster cross-disciplinary collaboration, we figured it would be helpful to figure out some channels and methods for doing so more effectively.

When I was at the School of Ma, we did one exercise that I found worked particularly well for seeding the exchange of ideas:

    Each member filled out a "Project Stack" on Hackpad, a list of ideas they'd had, no matter how vague or undeveloped.
    Other members could read and comment on the ideas, to help develop the ideas and possibly suggest collaboration ideas. 
    Finally, we all got together to chat and present our ideas, so group discussion could develop the ideas even further, hopefully into a concrete final project plan.

At last night's meeting there was agreement to try this approach, so to that end, I've put together a Project Stacks Hackpad where we can get the conversation started.

We also decided to re-purpose the Show + Tell on 7 Dec as an Idea Exchange, where we can do that last step of chatting in person about the ideas we've been developing.  (That means, please try to fill in some of your ideas before then!)

It's a good idea to keep a list of project ideas anyway, that we can consult periodically when the motivation (and time) for collaboration strikes us.  Lacunan A says to Lacunan B: "So I've been thinking about that project you posted a while ago, and I thought it would be cool if we did this..."

After all, that kind of conversation is what Lacuna is all about!


So that's all the news for now, but I'd say that's plenty for one week. ;)
It turns out there's no safe way to use Arturo's pole with the mount I have, so we'll need to buy one more piece before the project is finished, but progress has been made!

For tonight's SC Check-In, I wanted to propose that we use the time to make some forward movement on the website.  Namely, we should identify the underlying infrastructure, like what CMS to use, where we will host, etc... Hopefully such decisions can be made quickly and we can get to the exciting part of actually getting the designs coded and the content online.
My understanding was that the insurance contract was blocked by our e.V. not being fully founded and in the Vereinsregister. Wasn't this the word we got from the first insurance company we were communicating with?

Unless this new company is willing to give us a contract without our being in the Register, I think our situation won't change until we finish our Satzung discussions with Herr Pörksen...
No objection from my side, and I'd be happy to take care of us.

Only thing is that I still don't have the gate/building key(it's in the process as far as I know), so if I don't get it maybe someone can borrow me his for a day?
Hi Ramin!   I have the main room in Lacuna booked for next Wednesday the 25th for a dance performance, is it not showing up on the calendar for you?    Unless you mean the Wed after that (the 2nd) in which case that would be awesome to host them and I’d be happy to help out with it too. 

We'll have a few special guests at the Show + Tell on Monday: Rachel and her students at the School of Machines, Making and Make-Believe would like to come and share their project proposals for their final show at Spektrum on Saturday.

The theme of this month's School of Ma session is Facts and Fictions in the Age of Data: Art, Technology, and Data Visualization, so I'm sure the ideas will have some significant overlap with our interests at Lacuna.

Come meet the students and give your "professional" feedback! :)

FreeCAD Workshop

As mentioned in an earlier email, Mang has offered to teach a free workshop on 8 or 9 December at Lacuna on getting started with FreeCAD, with an emphasis on using his Polygon Construction Kit plugin to generate custom 3-D joints for sculptures like these:
Inline image 2Inline image 1

I haven't heard a lot of feedback from Lacunans who are interested (if you are, please speak up!), but I personally am pretty stoked about it and would love to host the talk at Lacuna.

To that end, I was thinking about opening it up on meetup.com, following the same space-limited format as we did with the Artgames meetup.

I wanted to check first here to see if there were any more Lacunans who wanted to attend (which would in turn limit how many public seats we would leave open), and whether there were any objections to the idea.

If I don't hear anything by mid-next week, I'll create the meetup.com invite and share it here.

That's all for now--time to go make some stuff with aBe and Mei and all the other attendees at today's Creative Code Jam.
Filipe Pirlo, a friend of mine asked me to have an excursion to Lacuna Lab with the students of his postgraduate seminar. The date would be Monday, November, 30th. He expects to have 10 participants. It is a mix of artists and philosophers. Till Wittwer will be giving a workshop about the Deep Web. Any Lacunian is warmly invited to join.

The seminar is about creative research on plant consciousness. Filipe was already in Lacuna in the very beginning—he and his group of thinkers were part of our first event ever in Lacuna (organized by Cyborgs).  

There is nothing planned so far according to the calendar. Is everyone alright with taking this opportunity to connect and having this workshop here?   
sorry for not answering right away after your meeting last week.

From looking at the Hackpad it seems like there is only one question about the Betriebshaftpflicht from Allianz:
"Are we required to be in the Vereinsregister before getting our contract?" I'll ask them about this now!

For the Inhaltsversicherung it seems like AXA is going to be a lot cheaper, if you plainly adjust the coverages. And if we ask for a new offer with lower coverage, I don't think that's going to change either.
So I think the question is, when can we expect to be a proper Verein and get the insurance? Should we wait or try to have something else (and maybe more expensive) like Allianz in the meantime?
I’d like to invite you all on Wednesday evening for a dance performance I’ll be involved in, happening at Lacuna Lab!  It’s an improvisation performance between a dancer, and poet, and myself.  It’s an ongoing/durational performance across 2 hours, so the audience is free to arrive any time during the performance, and leave as they will.   

Tomorrow (Tuesday) evening we will be doing a rehearsal in the main room between 7-10pm, so we will be moving the tables out of the way and using the projector.  The rest of Lacuna will be free for working in (so long as the main room is kept pretty dark, and fairly quiet.)  On Wednesday the performance will start at 8pm and last until 10. 

If you can’t make Wednesday but would still be interested in seeing the performance, we will also be performing on Thursday from 8-10pm at Kulturraum Mainz 7.  
Does anybody know if there is an original key I'm going to need to do this, or can I just take any of the copies we have? Do they even need a key to reproduce copies?
Can we maybe get a proper secure cylinder for that door before making more and more copies of the current insecure one? Insecure as anyone can learn how to open it in a minute or less by practicing for an hour. Without destroying it!

Last time I researched lock cylinders for anotjer space we choose the BKS Janus because it's resonably priced (for what it is), more keys are not too expensive and becuase it is really secure. It can only be opened by experts with a lot of time and special tools.
Unfortunately I won't be able to swing in to the Lab today, but our friend aBe was hoping to make some headway on painting the floor a brighter, more inviting colour. Hopefully some of us can get in to help!
we(well mostly Abe) painted the floor of the small room today, and it already looks way more fresh!

The paint needs about 24h to dry, so I guess it would be good to keep out of it until tomorrow afternoon.
Maybe it will need one more pass, but it's up to the people using the room!

Meanwhile you can use the common room, including my table(just be gentle to the stuff on it) since I won't be there until Tuesday morning.
How do people feel about Monday (before the Idea Exchange) or Tuesday evening next week to go over the current state of the website?

And I am still having wifi issues from time to time.  I think it's worth trying that ultra-long Ethernet cable that's already threaded through most of the space and just attaching another access point in the end room.

Also, unrelated and maybe deserving of another email, but...  Mang has decided to postpone the FreeCAD workshop until schedules calm down a bit after the New Year.
Announced this already in an unrelated email, but just so the context is right and people who care notice it:

Mang is busy the rest of December and has decided to postpone the FreeCAD workshop until after the New Year, so we'll revisit scheduling it in January.
Deep Web Workshop would be from 10 am to 2 pm. There still time for a meeting after this and before the ideas talk. I just wrote Filipe and asked him if he already found a new workshop leader. As soon as I have news I'll let you know.
I don't think that the smell is a big problem. The bigger issue is that there is nothing in the room when the workshop is going to start which means it has to be prepared from 9 am on. And I don't know how resistant the paint is after 24 hours (realistically it will only be 18 to 20 hours).

If it is possible to paint it tonight and make the second layer tomorrow evening I think everything is working fine. Otherwise, it is a bit risky. I am currently with my daughter and can't come around, but I could help with the second layer tomorrow evening.  
Hey Lacunians,

there is a Trello card regarding our final party for this year in Lacuna. I also created a Doodle two days ago asking for the best date for everyone to celebrate together. It seems like the link was not sent by Doodle :(

Let's start the conversation now! Check the Trello card for the first thoughts already made and use the Doodle to have a party before the year is over.
so we would need to buy that lock cylinders and would we need to pay someone to put it in. 
It's a little late for stopping to complete that basically every permanent member and coming in the future would have a key
to the lab for oneself.
if the total cost are considerable okay I would be okay with that. since we could new keys for all of use with one go and not have any hassle with coordinating :).
we could also the melt the old ones and make a sculpture out of them.

I don't know what of my things would be covered by the insurance if I just have them standing around there. instruments or any old stuff or whatever I probably don't have a bill for. 

so we could make an assumption how much in total get an idea how that is relative to our finances and make a vote on that?
Yes, We need to pay the cylinder plus keys. putting it in can be done by anyone that can use a screwdriver (it's just one screw). And I would just get like 20 or 30 keys because I guess the space will never have more than 30 members?! Getting keys with the cylinder is cheaper than having them made later, most of the time, also those keys can only remade by the factory if you send the physical "keycard" in, I guess thats a good thing but you need to have some extra keys because you can't just copy them everywhere.
I am with aBe here. Changing the cylinder doesn't seem very convincing to me. If at all, I suggest buying a Querriegel- or Panzerschloss. This would help against people that are simply breaking the door from outside with a crowbar. The cylinder is too short to prevent from that. And I also think it has to be installed by a professional.  
I googled a little trying to find out if we are allowed to change the lock by ourself without losing insurance protection. I couldn't really find an answer. It seems to be possible but might depend on the individual insurance company and contract.
is anyone planning to attend the Deep Web Workshop? I am currently in the situation where I have to find someone to open the door for the participants. I have to teach at the school and can only be in Lacuna from around 11.30, 12 on. The person I asked to take over my lesson just canceled its assurance. I still try to find someone to give him/her my lesson so that I can be in Lacuna myself. In case I fail, is anyone willing to take over that task for me (maybe someone who will be there anyway)?
Yes, I love this idea!  It's a collaboration that every one of us can take part in, creating the "voice" of Lacuna. :)

Let's chat more about it tonight at the Idea Exchange!
Nice idea.  I can definitely contribute some text at some point.

Sorry I will miss the meeting tonight about the exhibition.  I am totally keen to be involved in 1 or more projects and don't have any fixed ideas myself so keen to work with others on their ideas.
Hey, maybe of interest to someone?

The Museum of Tomorrow in Rio has a fellowship program for someone at the intersection of art, science, and technology. Though it says applications due yesterday, they've extended the deadline to Dec 20. Looks like they pay for your transport to Rio, and you get reimbursed for room and board and transport in Rio, but that's it.
I'm leaving tomorrow for Madeira residency and I'll be away for two weeks.
Since slime moulds started growing they'll need a bit of a care while I'm away.

So please help me out by giving them a few drops of water every day!

You're all busy people, so after talking to a few of you I decided to make this doodle where we can check who can take care of the creatures on which day. Link to the instructions page is also in there:

http://doodle.com/poll/9e3smqyxg47f2ybe

The air in lacuna is so dry that I'm afraid we can't miss a day:(

Drinks on me when I come back!

If you have any questions please email me.

Thanks and see you in two weeks!
Have a great Christmas and enjoy the Lacuna party.  I am flying to New Zealand tomorrow - back 2nd February - so I will be celebrating with you in spirit, unfortunately not in person.

Was a great year with you all and can't wait to be back and see what 2016 brings for Lacuna.
See you next year
Projection is gonna happen at lacuna new year. But I guess the big one
is enough for that.
Regarding the shelf. Do you know already where it could stand?
the furniture situation got already quite delicate.
there was a lot of work done on the website by the developers in the past weeks. The upcoming meeting could be used to talk together about the level reached. We could make some changes here and there, to get closer to the point where we can say the first iteration is finished for now.

Let's try to go online by the end of the month. :) What do think?

(This message especially addresses Ramin, Marcel, aBe and Aurelia and of course Soma, who could maybe join on Skype.)
Firstly, I'd like to point out that I'm turning this in before the official deadline :) I'm attaching a PDF as well as text below in case you have any trouble. No need for encrypting as it's a combination of public text: my thesis and a recent submission proposal. Only thing - there is a section on the second to last page with a list of references (feels free to remove if you think it may be problematic).
first of all thanks to everyone who participated at the meeting yesterday. It was really a big step forward and great fun!

Aurelia and I went out for a beer afterwards and both agreed on the fact that it was the best and most productive SC Design & Identity meeting so far.

Secondly, I wanted to kindly ask everybody to complete the list of native languages (spoken) in Lacuna. I need this for the texts I want to send to Marcel
We are planning a temporary exchange in the Porner room.

For the next 4 – 5 months Aurelia is going to work on two larger projects from Berlin and Paris and is not going to be at Lacuna meanwhile. 
At the same time, I'm going to collaborate with my friend Derk on a larger VR project (involving Unity and the Oculus Rift) until summer. We need a space to be able to work together almost full time.
Derk would now like to sublet Aurealia's desk for the next couple of months, so we could work together from here. It would be a great solution to all of us!
I think so far nobody else from Lacuna knows Derk really, but he is definitely is a super cool and friendly guy. I can totally vouch for him!

Everybody of the room is already cool with it. But we also wanted to ask you for any objections?

We would actually like to move Derk's stuff in here on Monday already. So in case you have any thoughts or questions about this, please answer until Sunday, 17th of January, 12:00 noon. We hope that's not too spontaneous.
Just wanted to add him to the Trello board and found out that he is already added there since November. The other potential members on the waiting list are currently on hold as far as I know.

I also think, it would be nice to integrate people into Lacuna as much as possible. Though, finishing a project with the help of a temporary residential buddy should maybe be possible without the deep background check that is meant for permanent members. Maybe the targeted timespan for the residency is a factor that could define the rules for the procedure?  
Just wanted to add I still plan to be a Lacuna member and contribute! For me at least, it's more a matter of time at my personal desk over the next few months, and subletting the desk space seems mutually beneficial as I'll be mostly offsite from 10-7pm during the week. I'll come Monday and chat in person - twas thinking of this as still coming Mondays and for events, still collaborating on projects as planned, and of course coming by to hang out as I miss yinz:) 

On the other hand, more on how to participate with upcoming projects soon!
okay, I don't want to rush if there are concerns.

As we're going to bring the rest of my stuff from my old office on Monday, he'll be around to say hello and join us for the Show & Tell. I also sent the questions to him.
The swing was a nice idea, but nowdays it seems, it doesn't have a relevance anymore. So it seems like date just hanging, blocking the calendar. That why I would suggest to take it out of the calendar, and swing like meetings happen on a informal bases.
any comments?

Another thing-
David Huerta visited us at the last show+tell two weeks ago.
He told about NYCResistor, a collaborative space in NY. Some interesting thing is that they make the rent with workshops. Members of the space, they don't really do coworking there, I would say it's more like a community shared fablab, with more workshops.
Members are obligated to do workshops, forgot how many, or otherwise pay themselves out. so part of the workshop money goes to the holder the other part to the space.

I thought of lacunians could hold workshops and maybe people we invite. for free or shares whatever we decide. an incentive for outsiders could be that they could attend a couple of workshops for free. teaching, learning, inspiriing...

also I think we need to find to way to maybe get people who work here as residents included and idea sharing process.  No more tools or email list. maybe we could open up hackpads for that.
let's remove the swing from the calendar or at least, change the recurring date to something like once in a month.

As far as I know workshops have always been a part of the idea behind Lacuna. Though, I think it is a process to get there, especially when you want people to say something good about it afterwards. You have to prepare, announce and perform them. Not to forget the subsequent works. We already had some very promising experiments. The problem is to find someone who feels responsible for it. Maybe another SC is a good idea. Something like SC Events & Collaboration where we can discuss and suggest what is happening next, how things should be happening etc. and to give everything a decent structure for growing. This could be done on a hackpad, in real meetings, on Trello etc.

That's my two cents + I support this initiative :)
I also agree that swing seems to be too unspecific to have it fixed on everybody's calendar every other weekend. However, one of the thing meant for the swing day was to clean the space, and I think we need a better solution for what we have now, which relies on just a few of us maintaining the space.

I can understand we all have tons of things to do and stressed out about our own deadlines, so it might be hard for people to volunteer to clean the shared space. So I want to propose to have a cleaning man/lady once every week to clean the shared area - the kitchen, the toilet and the ground. So we have a nice and clean place to work in. Though, I still think people should clean their own dishes and cups. It would be quite scary to have dishes stacked up for a days or even weeks. (And sadly despite the sticker in the sink, used cups are still accumulating...)
What do you think?
Some fantastic points in this thread!

My understanding of the point of the Swing is that it included a few different things: in addition to cleaning and tidying, more of an emphasis on improving the space (putting up shelves, curtains, etc.) but also a regular occasion for doing things together (even projects) in the midst of hectic schedules. Maybe someone can jump give more clarity on what the main idea is, but if the above is correct I wouldn't be behind getting rid of it altogether unless it is (already) replaced by something else. But monthly would be ok.

I agree with Mei-Fang that the space should always be clean and tidy. I always figured hiring a cleaner would be a good solution otherwise it falls to a handful of people which isn't really fair. Regarding the sink area specifically, we could also consider Wischi's original proposal to get a dishwasher.

Workshops: Yes, they were always part of the initial vision. Arturo's doing openFrameworks workshops, right? I'm definitely behind workshops as a way to pay the rent. There's the obvious model: the workshop giver pays Lacuna for the time/space used, but only in the case that the workshop makes money. All Lacunans benefit because it's possible that membership fees could go down through this. Though the pricing should incentivise actually giving workshops. Also, as we were saying before, workshops need to be in line with what we do at Lacuna. And, of course, balanced with Lacunans needing to use the space. Yeah, an SC is definitely a good idea here.

@Ramin - Re: "also I think we need to find to way to maybe get people who work here as residents included and idea sharing process.  No more tools or email list. maybe we could open up hackpads for that."

By residents, do you mean long-term Lacunans or short-term residents? Would like to understand more of this idea.
Another way to make some money is to apply for funding. Actually, tomorrow is a meeting about proper applications for money from the recently created City Taxe in Podewil. This money is a unique opportunity where the city of Berlin is explicitly giving money to independent projects of the Freie Szene. It would be very interesting to see if we can apply for that money or what we have to do to apply in the upcoming period. 
Agree with all of the above! Just wanted to add my 2 cents about one aspect of the Swings I was hoping to see and which could take their place if still a monthly (and/or voluntary Sunday appearance), especially if removing the setup / cleanup needs to other times or tasks:

Collaborative Project Days 
• a more internal kind of workshop/hack day/jam with a joint project in mind
• those who show up could propose and vote
• e.g. a GPS to get you lost, smart textiles, Spektrum exhibition starting, joining our Be Another Lab Berlin work days, ...

Discussions 
• to encourage philosophizing, getting to know areas of research, creative processes
• Sarah, you had mentioned a while ago some nice ideas of how to fuel these in an engaging way?
• playful formats: roundtables, unconferences, etc.
• e.g. around broad questions or themes (Space, Time, Intelligences, Futures, Information)

Perhaps these could be open to outsiders if we directly invite them, but main goal could be for us as a collective to inspire common ground?
They may motivate ideas for workshops, and more public-facing events as well down the line..
Does anyone have a video camera (small/easy to use is great, preferably able to record at least an hour at a time) that I could borrow for a few days, to shoot some video for a performance, and then to record the performance on Saturday?
we had another Show & Tell on Monday. Derk was happy to join us and introduced himself a little bit. I'm sure it's still hard to know anybody from just a couple of hours, but I hope this could at least erase the phantom image of him in your mind.

Of course we didn't discuss the topic of subletting in front of him. So after a few of you had the chance to meet him, I would like to ask all of you again, if there are still concerns or anything else we should discuss?
If there are no further questions or comments until the end of Saturday, I would like to let him join us on Monday.

Besides the general question of having him around, there is also the question of how he should pay rent and what key he could have? 
I just talked to Abe and we agreed it would be best, if he paid Lacuna directly and setup a proper contract to make it more transparent for everybody. 
Additionally I would like to have another upstairs key made for him as suggested during the Show & Tell. Carolina needs another one too, so I'll have 2 keys made in total. Anybody else? I know Wischi liked to have a new lock installed instead. But it's hard to tell when this is going to be realized. It's only two more keys to have one for everybody, so I think it's okay to get these now.
What do you think?
it was nice to meet him,
for completeness I created an anonymous doodle. Don't vote if you are fine. no if you're not.
He should for sure have a contract and it's okay that he gets a key for for the lab. I think gate-keys are only for permanents, but not sure.
Thanks Ramin! Where can I find the doodle? Am I missing something?
Gate keys are at least harder to make. We'd need permission from the land lord. Also the place to have them made is almost outside Berlin. But luckily Derk wouldn't need one. He'd be using the Lab between 10am and 5pm during the week.

Hey Wischi, I like the idea of a more secure lock! We discussed it shortly in a SC. How can we decide on this?
Yes, let's still have a Swing once in a month and please set a more obligatory time for it. It's more motivating, if everybody starts together!
Unfortunately I only attended a few times, but found it hard to figure out the best time for showing up. When would people be there? Once nobody showed up after all. :(

I wouldn't mind hiring a cleaner and having a dish washer! Can we afford it?
I guess you are asking because of the Derk doodle.
That was a anonymous doodle, where the participants are specified in the beginning only in order to make sure that there is only one vote by each of them. I copied the mail addresses from here:

anyway, that doodle was only to vote a "no", so if you would go for a "yes" which i highly suspect there is no need for you.

the doodle was created 3 days ago. normally there is one week to wait. so far nobody voted "no".
I would say Derk can join already. In case somebody would still vote "no"- shit hits the fan 
I'm not talking about money only here.
More about open events / free or paid workshops and creating a workshop culture.  These workshops must not be high end -let me show you something,  but also intros to certain topics and participatory /experimentation events.
Also the idea of having people from outside to give them and then allow them to participate in a number of events.

Ok swing once per month sounds like a consensus.  I'm gonna set to the 1.sun of a month.

There could also be a separate cleaning day. Not sure about the finances.  Who really is?
As a month passed by and my contract is about to end. There is time to decide for everyone if you want to keep me or not.
From my point, I totally feel home, as I think we are doing the same kind of art. None collaborative project started yet, but some in the process of becoming and others from outside joint already. So there is much more to come, from each others experience, new ideas and plenty of motivation.

I would like to ask for a decision, so I can make plans for the next weeks. The decision should also include some thoughts where I can actually have a permanent desk, as my hidden spot was just temporary.

Hopefully I can stay, but a ‚no‘ wouldn’t lead to eternal hate :P
I could start an anonymous vote like usual already but I think another permanent member would only go into the elevator room or after an rearrangement of the main room. He was staying at the soldering station, which didn't make the soldering people happy. but I guess he got never informed that he could go to somas place or wischi's, which turned into marcel's working place number 7.
My concern is that the more permanent we have the less flexible we are with getting residents. opinions?
Sorry I've not been terribly communicative lately, but I've been dealing with some unexpected business in the US.

As a result, I am having to extend my time here to try and get things resolved before heading back to Berlin, so I won't be back Europe-side until 28 February at the earliest.

I'm really looking forward to getting back into the swing of things there and working with everyone toward the Spektrum Exhibition (which will sneak up on us before we know it!).  It makes me happy to see the emails continue coming through, around the exhibition planning and the website development and deployment.

I unfortunately don't have a ton of free time while I'm here, but please do let me know if there's anything I can do to help on any front: planning, communication, development, or otherwise.

Hope 2016 has been courteous to everyone so far, and see you in a little over a month.
I'm updating the spreadsheet with all the members on lacuna and the period and space they are using.

So please, I need to know your plans for next months: If you will be at lacuna, if you are traveling for some weeks, or if you won't be at lacuna at all. Unless up until July.
Yesterday at the SC meeting it seemed like a few more people were interested in knowing more about the insurances. So here are the offers they sent us. I'm happy about everybody joining us at reading and discussing this in detail.

It doesn't seem like we need a new offer by them, since these are rather general proposals and not official offers. Nothing to sign in these papers.
I just wrote a tiny randomizer (see the screenshot) to create a list for cleaning the toilet & kitchen. I'll shift myself to the first for the toilet as I assume nobody would be so pleased to be the one to clean the toilet which hasn't been cleaned for a long time. aBe requested to be the last one as he has been doing a lot of improvement and cleaning around there. So here is the result.
I will finally be back in Berlin as of next week. Arriving on 2nd so should be around later next week.
Thanks for updating the members list Carol, sounds like lacuna is getting full. I will be doing my usual 'Berlin for a few weeks and then traveling' for feb - July. But have a few projects that I'll be working in at lacuna so hoping to have as much time there as possible :)
Has been exciting seeing all the emails, can't wait to be back.
Great to see orient carpets are included.  Makes me consider to bring one. My main question would be how we proof that we owned something and kept it lacuna in a case something happens. 
I definitely don't have the bill for all my things flying around.  Also probably not all expensive stuff. But I'll have a closer read and then we might have short exchange of all readers.
It was easy to proof ownership, when I took an insurance from that company last time. You need to buy a daily newspaper, makes pictures with the newspaper and the object on the same picture and send it to the company at the beginning of the contract. That's it.

So the Betriebsinhalt automatically includes the 1000€ (and I hope per person … we should ask again). I'm not sure, but assume professional/private doesn't matter. We were then talking about another insurance (Elektronikversicherung) that is not included in this email, since they needed more information. It covers all professional electronics and valuable things. The two insurances kind of overlap … we have to figure this out! 

Let's make a comparing list:

Betriebsinhalt
- we name a value in total, I think. 
- electronics are only included up to a certain amount and as far as I remember only if it's kaufmännisch, like PCs to do the accounting
- stationary only

Elektronik
- we name values per item in a long long list.
- this is made for electronics and expensive stuff. It covers rented stuff acquisitions and in advance.
- mobile insurance is possible
- it even covers accidents and stupidity

Feels like we need Betriebsinhalt with a low value like 20.000€ for Lacuna stuff in general. And then Elektronik based on the items values which mostly belong directly to the members. I could imagine there could be huge differences between the members. If that's a problem we could uncouple those costs from the rent each member pays.

I already have this Elektronikversicherung for my stuff and like it a lot. It's an okay price, I think. And you get (and pay for) replacement values, not time values. In case the building burns down you "just" go and buy new things. I had to make a list with serial numbers, the values and newspaper photos of the things I didn't have receipts for. In the list I could define per item wether I wanted it to be insured in up to 3 stationary places/addresses or mobile within EU, within Europe or worldwide (mobile is more expensive of course). It also covers acquisitions (and as far as I can remember, rented equipment) to a certain amount in advance, so it's usually enough to update the list once in a year. Price is 0,6% – 1,2% of the insured value per year.
In this case, does it make sense that each of us has her/his own
Elektronik insurance? Some may want mobile, some not, and I can imagine
the list being very long and "frequently" changing.

What are the pros/cons of having one for all, or each their own?
Today ​I've been writing them again answering their questions about the Elektronikversicherung. I hope that they might have a better deal for us ​as Verein.

If they end up offering us the same insurance as I have, I think generally everybody could have their own insurance. But the minimum fee is 125€ per year. Maybe people exceeding this could make their own contract and everybody else get's it as a group?
Two more points for people who weren't in the meeting -

1. "Toilet area" covers also the entrance + sofa area
2. We agreed that the person who is in duty this week will inform the person in duty next week as soon as they finish their task. 

I've just finished the toilet area yesterday and realize it might be better if the two person in duty do the entrance + sofa area together as:
1. it is more fun to have someone to chat with :)
2. easier to move the sofa and stuff around when vacuum cleaning the floor (i can't move the sofa on my own)
3. "toilet + sofa area" feels quite a lot for one person to deal with, while kitchen area is rather easy

But I'll leave it for you guys to decide :).

Here is the updated list with everybody on the list. If at the end Peter and Nuno won't be joining us, I'll remove their names from the list manually.
Can you share a link with more information about the Elektronikversicherung? Their premiums seem super low. When I checked insuring electronics a few years ago, it was more between 8 and 15% of the value per year which is of course to high.
Nuño helped me with some tricky parts, so I've been able to fix the grid of the website mostly. Though, it's not optimized everywhere for smaller screens yet.
We spent a good amount of time designing the mockup and I think it's well thought-through. So for the upcoming development, it would be great, if these could be respected. The best and easy way I know, is to use browser plugins like PerfectPixel, which add images as overlays to the page. It's then easy to compare the mockup to the current state of the site and be truly pixel perfect. 
But of course, if something in the mockup is weird or doesn't fit to our needs, feel free to start a discussion about it or ask Aurelia, Thomas or me!
From the description it's either Rudiger who started the the Soma lab(I've sent an email about it once) or someone else involved in it.

Marc founded Hackteria but he lives in Switzerland, I doubt it was him. He was here for a week and I helped him organize biohack promo evening in Spektrum.

Anyway, it's a great idea to invite this mysterious person for show'n'tell to clear it all out:) It would be great to have some biohacking workshops in Lacuna!

Btw, if you are into bioworkshops there is going to be one during transmediale about building bio-propellers. It's by Howard Boland from c-lab in uk - I went to two of his workshops and they were fun! That's where I first met Sarah&Eliot&Ramin:)
If he said that he talked to me about space in Lacuna last Febuary, then it’s Rudiger.  While our group was still looking for a location for Lacuna, he and I were in touch about the possibility of their bio hack-lab being a part of ours (kindof like how Cyborgs are part of Lacuna, but they would have needed an entire room).  I’m glad that they found somewhere else for their lab that worked out, it was a pity we didn’t have enough space for them. 

I‘d very much be in support of letting them to hold some workshops and talks here at Lacuna, while they are waiting for their space to be ready. 
Who has set up the voting in the past, so that we can get the ball rolling with it?  

We are still trying to figure out where he could put a permanent desk (and if there is actually room), but we can at least decide officially if we want him as a permanent member.  Then once he is ‘confirmed/approved’ as a member, we can offer him permanent part-time for now (no fixed desk other than what’s available month to month, like Soma’s currently).  This place is a work-in-progress, and hopefully in the near future we can work out a permanent spot for him.   But in the mean time, let’s not make him wait to know if he is in or out.  

Also I think he’s really nice and talented and is a great addition to Lacuna.
So to summarize all the proposed points + my proposal:

1. Peter will use Soma's desk temporarily in February

2. We'll set up a vote to decide if we want Peter to become a member

3. If we want Peter to stay, we'll have a short meeting to see if we have the space for another fixed desk. If the answer is NO, what do we do with Peter. (@Carolina: do we have the spreadsheet ready? It would be useful to take a look at it when discussing the space issue)

What do you think? If nobody is against the idea, I can set up an anonymous vote for Peter & arrange a time for (3) (maybe we can hijack 15 minutes from the exhibition meeting to talk about it?).
Hi there, maybe I'm out of the know, but once you vote on Peter and if he stays, he'd probably be happy to be involved in the discussion on where he sits, no? Maybe I didn't understand something, but sounds like you feel you need all the answers now for where, but is it also possible to move forward in smaller steps? Worst case scenario: you want him, don't have a permanent space, he say no --- but that is ok too. As some people have mentioned, the desire to keep him is separate from if you have space, and with these two things, he can decide what is best for himself....
Seems like the company needs a confirmation via e-mail only. Could a chairman please send this back to them? Don't know if I'm legally authorized to do it. Just forward this conversation, or attach the contract and say we like to activate it. (Which is basically what I already asked him)
If the project ideas are still relevant, would a like-grid still be useful, as proposed in december? What I mean is a grid with project ideas as columns, and people as rows, and you can tick the projects that you'd like to work on - seemed a missing link from projects ideas to actual execution was selecting projects and clustering into teams, and such a grid could help with decision making. I'd be happy to make one, perhaps on doodle, but I'd like to understand the current planning approach you all are using.
everything is still relevant. :) The next step is to distill one idea everyone can somehow identify with (from all the material we have collected so far). Therefore, I think your proposed like-grid could be very useful. We're planning to have a meeting on Sunday to make some further conceptual work. Feel free to join us.
There was some mention of meeting at Lacuna to head over together, just wanted to mention I'm in Mitte so sounds like I'll be heading over a bit earlier directly from here with the others. If we can find each other after the talks, we should all grab a drink after and/or see the exhibition! Not sure as I've never been myself before, but the others here mentioned it starts at 7 and it's good to be early as they get full.
Would be cool to have some more people in the discussion there! It seems like this is another crucial part where we figure out what Lacuna actually should be.

When should I summarize the thoughts and send it to them? I would not like to drag this behind for another few weeks. And meanwhile Lacuna still doesn't have an insurance … So how about a deadline at Sunday night.
I enjoyed the party yesterday for a couple of hours. It was nice to see all this crazy and interesting stuff happening at Lacuna. At a certain point I became kind of worried though. It's been quite a few people in there after a couple of hours and I became afraid, things could be damaged or even disappear.
Before I left, Aurelia and I put Arturo's MacBook and small PC in Soma's shelves. I also took the white projector from a rather exposed spot and put it near Soma's desk.

I'm writing, because I think we need to discuss larger events again. 
When the inplant/explant party was announced, I didn't think of it as such a big event. And as most things were left from Lacunans as normal, I guess other didn't expect it either.
It came to my mind that last time, when we talked about workshops, we agreed to a maximum of 15 participants (and as far as I remember a min. ratio of Lacunans vs. visitors was suggested). It was also suggested to lock the small rooms rooms as safe area for expensive or fragile things. 
This time the inplant/explant zone, which was kind of the purpose for this whole evening, was put in the porner room. It probably totally made sense, to safely and calmly to do the stuff back there. But it also attracked people to those small rooms.

I'm simply wondering why we worry about safety during workshops and then party in those rooms without preparing it properly (at least I felt like my desk was not prepared for this). I don't judge anything or anybody. But let's please discuss on Monday, how we could improve this next time.
I've got this shelf, which could be used in the main or storage room.
The shelf in the main room currently has a few card board boxes flying around, that look project related. Maybe stuff like that could fit in there nicely. Everybody could occupy and label a few shelf boxes as needed.
Within the next few weeks I'll probably have a chance to use a rented transporter and could bring it to Lacuna.

What do you think? Let's discuss it tomorrow at the SC meeting!
I must say I'm very disappointed. We were three days working on painting our room, taking every piece of furniture out and in again. Trying to make the space nicer.
We arrive this morning and is a piece of shit, all dirty again, I have to clean all my desk, all  the balcony with empty bottles, cups.

This is not a club, at least I expect my desk and our room is not.

I have things to work on besides cleaning beer on my desk, and try to clean the air for the terrible smell, having  the window open on winter for one hour.

I hope we can tall about this and about who is responsable for security of out stuff when there is so many people outside from lacuna using the space without advice.

Of course as Arturo said I expect the floor to be on the conditions we left it on Thursday by the end of this week, and I'm not cleaning the toilet this week.
I also remember discussions about voting where we said anonymous voting can't work in principle for those reasons. If one member feels like someone shouldn't join, (s)he should discuss her/his reasons with everyone (and feel supported to do so). Therefore, being anonymous in the first place makes no sense. Unfortunately, I don't think this reasoning was shared with everyone at the time but better late than never.
You might be right.  I looked into the hackpad it only says "vote". I don't know if that vote would then run with the same procedure as other votes- and how that precisely is. Further discussion is happening right  now ;) and could also be in an all-hands or board meeting.
Well If there is a vote about a person you don't feel comfortable with, that might be enough to change the mood climate if that person gets in anyway.
Or if you feel like the space gets  uncomfortable packed if more people join,  then also a respectable position.
Non of these is the case.  I like peter and I don't think the space if packed yet - but almost. I voted no, since I think there is a developer dominance in the space already and I would like to see members background more diverse.  E.g. design,  film making,  musician. ...
Also the space is basically on the limit of permanent members with 1 or 2 places left maybe so we should not rush to fill them up.
Anyway,  10 of 18 voted, which is n ot alot for such a decision, so I don't know if there is strong yes from all the people who know him if that's the case I would give in and let him join the space 

I will try to start today with that. actually yours and nenads input would valuable since you were the only two who joined afterwards so far.

okay, but vereinsmembership and permanent member of the space would be something differen then right? I think we all like the idea of having residents or friends involved as an extended part of the lacunalab people network, we don't have infrastructure for that yet, there shold be still a mailinglist for members only. maybe a hack/etherpad could do it. maybe its not necessary at all. if they would join as vereinsmitglieder would be a formal option. not sure what the advantage would be tho.
Good of you to be open about your 'No' vote. Actually, from what I know, Peter's main background is physics, and then computing but, not to split hairs. Good that you're considering also formal reasons for taking new people on such as skill sets we're lacking. We should talk about this further. But I agree with Jerry that this should already be agreed before even taking someone on as a resident to not give false hope.
welcome back and welcome on board.
After a discussion about the skill diversity in the space, we decided to welcome you as a permanent member.
there are some formal things, space contract for a longer period, vereins membership (or are you already member?) and eventual key contract- but its not clear if you can get a gate/house key already, since every new key, needs to be verified by the mietgesellschaft.
there is also a trello board I added you to and a hackpad- which will be replaced hopefully soon. feel free to look around. there will be more details soon.
I am really glad to hear that we will go our artistic adventures together. There is lot of projects already approaching. I will present more of my work soon, so you can have better insight of what we can do together.
Sorry … ! Since we are looking for a new lock anyway and the whole deposit situation is not evened out yet, I thought it would be okay to only write this mail as interim solution. But sure, we never know how long it will take us to get the new lock.
I hope the organizer can come over to take care of the cleaning asap. At lacuna we've finally agreed on the cleaning schedule, but because of this unresolved issue people are refusing to do their duties. it would be really sad to see this effort in keeping the place tidy ended in vain.
Sorry for the mass email, but I'm trying to put the word out in case anyone knows of anything: I'm searching for housing starting around April (also would love to hear if there are things after as well) as my current subletter is coming back to town... Thanks ahead of time!
fter the all hands meeting of lacuna yesterday we decided that it's necessary to update you about the guidelines of how to run public events and clearance how cyborgs and lacuna relationship is defined.
There are a few members of lacuna who want to meet with you for that.  I added stefan,  since he hosts pnp when Enno can't.
Are you available Wednesday, maybe 1h before pnp. If not please find a date in this thread.
This is a draft for guidelines running a workshop or similar public events.
judging from my recent visit, the dish/glasses-in-the-sink situation is not dire for normal functioning of the lab, but just in case it's interesting especially as an easy practical solution to exceptional situations, I searched for small dish washers on kleinanzeigen, and they seem to come up with some regularity, some under 50 eur.
fortunately I did most of the points naturally on our normal meetings except clearing the main table before a meeting and putting away the bills. Fort that I need to know, where the hidden box is, I didn’t heard of by now.

I don’t think, any of us use glasses - always bottle that I put away in the evening. As well guest use leave in some money when they take bottles, but I regularly I throw in 5-10 Euro on my behalf and for not paying guests.

Wed at 7pm is fine to me! Will you be there, too?
it went well. :) We started structuring some ideas and thoughts into concrete ideas. There are still a lot of notes on the chalk board that are looking for a caretaker. Take a look there to see how, where and to whom you (and the others that weren't present) can connect to.

We also started a Project board on Trello to better organize the work in the teams that have already formed and the things that have to be done in general.
it's my birthday on Sunday. I would like to invite all of you to whatever is going to happen at Saturday night. Don't know yet wether this should be a party or not. What do you think? :)
It's probably going to happen at my shared appartment at Siegfriedstraße 44 in Neukölln. I'll send you more info soon.
I know I'm in charge of cleaning the kitchen. 
But since a couple of days a lot of work is piling up on my desk, which I can't postpone. I didn't expect this to happen, but I'm actually glad if I can finally earn some money.
Well, I'm probably not going to be able to clean before mid of next week. So in case someone feels like it needs to be done before, I need to ask if there is somebody who would like switch shifts with me!?
I actually already switched with Sarah in the first place. Sorry for all this.
Nenad cleaned the kitchen on Saturday. I told him that it was his turn by mistake (sorry!). Could you please put your name at a slot when you absolutely can do it? 

I also want to take this opportunity to remind everyone that it would be really appreciated if you know you can't work on the duty in your week, please announce it ASAP and find someone to swap the time with you. I believe it's quite unlikely to find someone on very short notice.
Has been a while but I am back in Germany (for a bit).  Should be back at Lacuna next week and looking forward to seeing everyone.

I would like so use the storage space under the loft to set up something for filming.  I want to be able to control the light so this is ideal as I can block out most of the natural light. 
Is everyone ok if I take over this space for most of March?  I am not entirely sure how long this will take but hoping 3 - 4 weeks should be enough.

I ran this by a few people when I made a brief visit a couple of weeks ago but want to check with everyone if this is ok.  Let me know!
I am totally up for him staying!
He usually anyway stays at the middle desk
(And its a good opportunity to find out, what crazy project he is working on)
tomorrow is the next meeting for our exhibition planning. Please join!

On Friday's exhibition opening in Spektrum, I had the chance to talk to Lieke briefly. They expect us to send some preview material and texts for their website within the next two weeks.

So, we better hurry and start doing something. This also means we need a working website they can refer to.
So sorry to hear that, Arturo!  We will miss you and Carolina's presence in the space!  

Glad that you may still keep involved as non-permanent, or with workshops, events, etc.  Would be so sad for you both to disappear completely from the community! 
I would also go with a minimum effort solution at this point as we need the official email address set up quite soon.

Where are we planning to host the site? Better not someone's personal hosting I would say since anyone working on the site should have access.
We thought about having the meeting next Tuesday at 5 pm. Soma and I will definitely be there. Anyone else is free to come. The meeting is already on the calendar. Could you ask Alfredo to come?
the next cyborg meeting will be on Friday. We plan to watch the movie „Operation Naked“ and the documentary „Ich weiß, wer du bist“ I worked on as production manager last year. The movie is about how society would react on smart glasses with that everybody could know anything about anyone. The documentary is about how realistic that scenario is from a technological point of view. We’ll need the projector for that. Unfortunately the movie is in German and hasn’t got subtitles yet. Nevertheless anyone, who is interested, is of course invited to watch with us. The author and director Mario Sixtus will be there, too. Because both films are under CC, public screening won’t be a problem in this case. But we didn’t make a bigger public announcement for not overcrowding the space.
Yes, they need to be sequential here too! But nobody cares about the what period the invoice is about. 
You can simply use the current date for all invoices you are writing. For example you could write "Rent June 2015 – March 2016" or "Rent August 2015" in the invoice, but use 03.03.2016 as invoice date.

If this was not possible, I wouldn't even know how to write any invoice. This get's mixed up regularly. For example I often start a new project before writing an invoice for the last project.
imho what jeremias said is true. you can issue a invoice with todays date but for the rent of june 2015 no problem. it should be accepted by the tax office for people that put those invoices in their bookkeeping to.
they might ask, why we issue invoices for june 2015 now but the answer is, we are a non-profit and the people that do our bookkeeping do it voluntarily and in batches and we are just starting as an organisation.
Would it be possible to send us a short abstract + image about the exhibition, so we can post a teaser on the website? Also, we just had an interview with ExBerliner, which will come out in the April issue, and they would like to mention this exhibition in there. So if you could send it over early next week, they can include it too.
I'm super busy finishing up things in Paris, but I'm happy to do a final english review of a draft for the 100 words if there's no one else available. That means there would have to be someone else who writes it first though:)

In terms of the image, if anyone wants to turn the fan box horizontal and simulate fabric blowing (2 people flapping out of the frame) be my guest. But perhaps someone has something betteR? Be back in town late Sunday night:)
sorry for the spamming, but as you probably know, renting in Berlin is a bitch :-D . 

A friend/new colleague of mine is looking for a space to stay. She’s looking for her own flat, but for the meantime, starting a week from now, she needs somewhere to live.
I can work on writing an abstract for the show over the weekend, so anyone who has any thoughts on what they think best describes what we are doing, any key words, phrases, descriptions etc for me to consider including, please send them to me ASAP.    
Also, are there any examples anyone knows of off hand, of the sort of writing style that would work best for this?   Any suggestions would be really helpful. 
as the subject already indicates, we are having a new statute now. :)

It contains one change in §13. It now says that all of Lacunas property has to go another Verein with a cultural benefit in case of Lacunas disbanding. This is a must for being accepted by the Finanzamt. 

I put a printout on the big table in the community room. Please be so kind and sign it asap. A copy is also attached to this mail.
There’s going to be a VR hackathon in Amsterdam on April 30!  I’m probably going to buy a ticket, it would be a great way to get to know the creative coding community in Amsterdam, connect Lacuna Lab with the hosts ‘Lava Lab’,  and to experiment with VR!   Anyone else interested in coming along?  Tickets are available now but these things sell out pretty fast (remember the Science Hack Day and how fast those vanished?)  
this thursday we invited Michael Seeman (mspro) to give a talk about „Platforms vs. State“. His last book „das neue Spiel“ is about the post Snowden age and his main claim is that digitalization of the world has changed the basic mechanics of how things work, i.e. society. The main issue: We cannot control the flow of data and information in the way that we used to.
So, thursday evening we’ll discuss around these topics - if you are interested, feel welcome to join, start is 8 pm!
Thanks a billion! The book-keeping stuff sounds like lots of work! Do you think we can automate part of the tasks, and split the non automatable stuff among everybody so no one feels overwhelmed by this way too often?

like the kitchen and toilet cleaning tasks - everybody needs to work on it only once every 3-4 months, that's not too bad IMO :)
That has a lot of prices from Netto and Getränke Hoffmann. I will try to find a company that can deliver drinks for a reasonable price aswell.

I think 1€ is ok for us, 1,50€ for workshops and maybe 2€ for parties. We might even be able to do 80 cent for us.

Rin and I will also order a Sackkarre so that we can use that to get new drinks from Netto.

Also one thing I noticed: The problem of people bringing bottles to Lacuna and leaving them here is bigger than people taking bottles with them. But maybe that can be fixed by having beer here so people don't need to bring Späti beer.
The new place I found for empty crates is in between the two elevator doors on the right side. The Sackkarre will also live there.
Everybody up for the exhibition meeting on Tuesday? What about, in addition to status updates on the various pieces, we also can use the time to group off and work on them?
Yup, I think we need to meet for all the Exhibition Meetings we have planned so far, and probably more so too. :)

A 'round-the-room status update would be a great way to start on Tuesday, so we can get a sense of how everyone is feeling about the feasibility and vision of their projects.

And yes, we should decide whether and how the inter-project connections should work.  We've all expressed interest in the idea, but there's been no real concrete discussions about how and what would be implemented this way.

And don't forget about the All-hands Meeting tomorrow to ratify our latest version of the Satzung!
Yesterday at the SC meeting lots of organizational issues were brought up to the table. One of the thing is that there are quite a few tasks to be taken care of but they are often under the shoulder of certain people. We need to discuss how to share the tasks, by forming new workgroups or through the existing sub-committees.
We want to make sure everyone at LC is accountable for certain stuff (don't worry, most of them are as simple as ordering drinks occasionally). So please try to find a day that you can make it to the meeting. For people who can't join us physically, you can either join us via Skype/jitsi or let us know what kind of tasks you would prefer to take care of in the future.
I'm just forwarding a discussion Mei-Fang and I started to have between the two of us (and Ramin reading). Again it's about cleaning and the question when in the week one is supposed to do it. Maybe be can continue all together during one of the next meetings.
Just a quick note to say that Thomas and I have been working on some improvements to our Trello boards today. It's still in progress but some things are already clearer, e.g., lists representing SCs on the Lacuna Lab board are now all in the same "format" and we refined the SC boards and the ALL boards a bit better.
I like the idea of having a timeframe of at least 5 days and a maximum of 9 days after the last person cleaned.

What I like even more: Just paying someone to do the cleaning regularly. That's the best option imo and it fixes a lot of potential tensions.
(Cost would be around 80€ per Month if we get 2h each week, see https://www.helpling.de/preise for example)
Honestly, I favor this option too. Hiring a person for doing only the task of one Lacunan (as proposed in the meeting yesterday) is really expansive, because you'd have to pay somebody for 2 or 3 hours at least. Having somebody cleaning kitchen, bathroom and sounds good to me though!

I know there are different opinions about it and I know Mei-Fang already put a lot of energy into getting this organized and I'm thankful for her doing that.
Still I would like to ask, how we came to the cleaning schedule. In one of the earlier discussion, when the topic became priority, I remember us talking about hiring somebody. And then I think a meeting happened (which I couldn't attend to) and we had a schedule instead. So has there been a voting about this, or did simply everybody agree? I would just like to know what the majority thinks about it.

I feel like we are discussing this topic quite often and think the situation won't improve a lot. Almost all shared apartments I know of have problems with it and I would like us to keep the energy for other stuff. 
If the majority likes to keep the schedule I'm totally cool with it. Just forgot/didn't get how exactly we came to it.
Just in case you don't remember: actually that cleaning discussion/decision was initiated by me proposing to use some cleaning service in an email. But in the actual meeting we decided to give the schedule a try. Now I am just helping with executing the decision.
Additionally, I created a template for the Status report on Trello that helps you to track your progress. It contains a checklist of 11 general tasks. You can simply copy the checklist or the entire card to your project. I suggest, you add and constantly review your own milestones to make it possible for the others to follow your progress. For this reason, change the tile according to the resulting numer of the progress checklist. Take a look at the Telescope card if you want to see an example.
egarding the task list Mei mentioned: my apologies for any misunderstandings, but I was suggesting that whoever takes the lead of organizing for this upcoming meeting help by collecting a list of existing tasks (as it could speed up the meeting itself). I don't actually have a list, and I'm also quite overloaded time-wise so I'm afraid I won't be able to help with this other than adding to a list when shared. Perhaps there are others who are able to help organize this?
Good point. I already have this in hand. As long as you create a card on any of our boards on Trello, apply the pink "Task" label and a priority label, it will be included for the meeting (with code magic). So...anything anyone things needs doing, make sure it's on Trello with those labels and it will be dealt with during the meeting.

If you're unsure of anything, reply to this thread.

P.S. Use the black "Recurring task" label instead of the pink "Task" label for...well, recurring tasks.
Yes, thanks to Thomas for setting up some framework for us, and to Marcel for being our point-of-contact.

Really looking forward to the ideas crystallizing into real-live projects. :)

This exhibition is our first major impression of Lacuna Lab on the creative tech community of Berlin--let's make it something we can all be proud of!
Not coming in tomorrow. Have to go buy a baby Fahrradanhanger in Prenzi. Leaving about 9:30. You probably not up early enough to come by and pick it up? Like around 9am? In Liegnitzer Str
We followed the agenda as set out by Marcel. One question was whether the Greenhouse will make it into the exhibition. The outcome was: YES. And it needs support from everyone. This Sunday is a Lacuna Swing so we plan to use this to prototype the Greenhouse. At this point the idea is a hanging tube that you can stick your head into to look at what's inside.
I wrote a script to randomise the roles (moderator, time-keeper, note-taker) in our meetings and make sure the same person doesn't get stuck with the same role all the time. So far it's in the Spektrum Exhibition spreadsheet on the Meetings sheet.
a few already know and I just want to let everybody know, that my plans of going abroad start to become more specific. 
We plan to leave Germany around the beginning of August to live, work and travel in New Zealand for around 12 months. We didn't apply for visa yet and don't have flight tickets. But it's all going to happen soon and it seems like there is a very low chance of anything going wrong with it. Which is good! :) As always with these things, I'll leave with a crying and a laughing eye and miss you and the space of course. But I'm very much looking forward to face new adventures on the other side of the planet for a while.

So I'll be out for a while and there will be a free desk for that time.
I guess there are a few things to discuss, like how to offer a place to another person with me being able to return? What kind of stuff I should remove from Lacuna and what could be useful for others? And worst case, what if I needed to come back earlier … ?

Let's discuss it within the next weeks. 
Maybe at a less packed SC meeting or some other time.
Hi peeps, just lettin ya'll know that i cant come tonight. im still stuck in wannsee finishing up some work.. enjoy everybody, ill try to stop by a little later.
So, as nobody is there today, when does anybody plan to go over tomorrow? I'm working during the day again and would come in the evening. 7pm or so.
seems like i dont have access to the doc there, can u grant some plz :)

im already on my way back home so see you asap.
There's a relaxed hangout tonight I go to regularly and I thought I might share it with you, I'd be happy to meet some of you there.
I don't think there is anything big settled, yet. i think there's much space downstairs for more desks, maybe even in the loft?? im wondering, a small desk for uninterrupted coding could be good there. 
altogether i think we gotta test some constellation out and adopt over the next days/weeks..

I wasnt in the lab today, cause im sick, so I dont know what all happened today. one thing i wanted to express is that i would be in general upset if almost every piece of space would be covered in tables, what would make it hard to do anything else than sit in the space. but we will figure it out, maybe we dont even need to many individual tablea as we can share some among us. lets see! :)
Another thing: Just wanting to let everybody know that I took the one left over backyard- and housekey for now. My usual schedule to come here is pretty late, so I might do the nightwatch now and then and would feel much better with having a key at the moment, so I dont stand in front of closed doors.

If anybody needs to get in late, drop me a message and I'll let you know weather I'm here orwhere to meet me to get the key, when I'm not around. 
I'll be renting a car on wednesday early afternoon and gonna bring a couple of small things to the space. Including a shelf I would sort of put into public hands in the space.

Enno, did you have the chance to get a picture of the chairs you were talking about?

Anybody else ohne Fahrschein and want me to pick something up?
just a quick one for anybody interested. im celebrating my birthday tonight a little. whoever feels like joining is happily invited to come over to my place in neukölln. 
I finally reached Mrs. Zander from Taekker regarding the hof keys. I've attached the document she sent me, with which we can go to the named keyservice and just get them copied ourselves. We gotta inquire ourselves how much one copy would be, though.

Who wants another key? Just drop me a mail on the weekend and I'll inform everybody about how many we're getting and how much one copy would cost on monday.
The doors can sometimes be closed, like yesterday evening, somebody locked the housedoor and the cyborgies couldnt enter. Luckily I was here and opened up.

Deposit system.. yeah. Why don't you make a suggestion. I'm not entirely sure I get your point... sorri :]
Sorry for spamming, but I just wanted to inform all of you that I am still in the process of getting the insurance sorted out for our space.

I have sent more detailed pictures and information about how to enter the space and so forth to my Makler and it seems to be in a annoyingly slow process, I really have no clue why it's not just a simple document.

An issue that popped up for me are the 'insecure' windows in the pornroom and the sleek office next to it. The fact that it's sorta easy to get onto the roof with a ladder and then potentially easy to break in, makes it an issue I don't want to ignore. Was the one window broken from since we started renting it? Should I contact Teakker about the whole situation and that we feel insecure with that? 
I will join you, bruv. Plus, there's prolly too much to discuss than what we can do in a usual ~2h general meeting. So maybe we can do it in a more smooth way, but longer? Somehow?
Did anybody already call the person and said that we want it? If not tell me ASAP and I call the person. I will ask for address and available times, so either you by foot or me by car on Friday can pick it up. Unfortunately I can't come over during the day today to help and hang out. Shoutout to the pupils!
I just got to the space and the window was wide open. Keep in mind we're not (yet) insured and so on. And i doubt the insurance would cover anything when anybody can just 'walk' in the space.

Apart from that, I'm getting keys tomorrow, so whoever wants some, gets some. But I'm still missing money from James, Arturo and Wischi. I'll get the keys anyways, hopefully I'm not ordering unwanted keys.
Sarah, Nayeli and me just found out that the money for drinks from the little treasure in the kitchen is gone, which we were gonna raid for buying some drinks for tonight. But its only a bit left, really. I suspect you, Claudine might have taken it, as Lacuna is still in dept with you regarding the drinks you bought earlier.
I'm sorry in case I ask questions regarding something that's already been sorted out, as I was gone for a week, but nobody else around knows either. 
I believe this sunday will be kind of an exception, as the OF group will meet all sunday, too. Don't get me wrong, but maybe it'll be slightly crowded already and we're sort of doing internal organization etc at the swing. At least it was the last time I attended, 1 month ago.
is anybody of you looking for a freelance job? It's a commercial installation that involves holographic gaze projection to be developed, analog punching cards to be analyzed, visuals to be coded and so on. It sounds all pretty sweet, but I'm currently too busy to take it. Holler at me in case this could be something for you. I'd classify it as a job that requires pretty advanced knowledge and experience.

I wouldn't say no to a collaborative thing, but I can't do it by myself at the moment. 
does anybody have time later around 6-7pm to help me carry a lasercutter to the lab? Its bigger and heavier than I expected and I'm worried of breaking it when trying to do it by myself. I've got a Sackkarre to support a little bit, but that thing doesn't really help on Kopfsteinpflaster, which we have in our backyard.

Anyways, it would be cool and we would have to carry it from Senefelder Platz (U2) via the underground.
No worries, Alex helped me out. Yeh, but I gotta get some security glasses first and then go through the setup of the thing. It's not that easy but that makes it usable for anything. The thing sorta gotta go in either the porner or the carpet room, because it's gotta be close to a window..
Unfortunately I doubt it'll be in operation before you leave.
I'm well aware of the fact that this is a laser that can cut things. Currently there's a sign on it to not use it, so we're all safe.

Cheers for the safety switch. But I guess we could just make it a rule to not open it, while the thing is lasering, huh? We're all sorta grown up, aren't we? ;)

I'll get some glasses anyway.

There is software shipped with it. I haven't had the chance to put my hands on it, yet, but I heard from the former owner, that it's a cracked version of Corel Draw, that has a plugin to control the machine with. And it's secured with a usb dongle, which is hilarious already.
I will inspect the device on friday or saturday. I have detailed info about how to use it, but it would be good if you could join, when you got some spare time on a friday eve? ;)
There's lots to figure out, lets talk in person though. Let me know when it suits you :)
as some of you might have noticed already, we've got a laser in the house now. I've just moved it to the carpet room in the corner because there's a window nearby, two doors to keep the smell at least only in one room and arturo and carolina are not there at the moment.

The thing works almost perfect but it has a major downside: smell. It's not that it smells like the devil himself, but it can't be denied it leaves a trace. It's burning material in the end.. so..
But I'm in the process of optimizing the air ventilation, lets see how that goes.

I remember us having the rough plan to keep this room as somewhat of a working room, where it can be noisy/smelly/dirty. Needless to say its the opposite right now, which is actually fine with me, but I wonder what the overall mindset about a rather dirty piece of equipment is. Do we have space/capacity to do these kinda things? I'm the last who wants to annoy people with what I do, let's discuss how we could handle that..

I've been asked by Ramin to create a trello card and start a vote. Maybe there's some space for general comments on this before and then I'll set up a vote for whatever options we're coming up with.
damn, looks like one neat lasercutter. there's a fire extinguisher at lacuna already.. i ordered one.
apart from that i got a new ventilator, more tubes and so on. i'll see and get it to lacuna soon and give it a go. i'm not sure i got a strong enough vent (it was 20 instead of 1000€) but we'll see. i got a plan about air filtering too, which ill check out soon.
I can just second that, the scope sessions are always very nice, and in-depth sessions. It's usually not too crowded, which makes it a good platform to actually talk a bit about some stuff. Plus the entire posse who's hosting it is a cool bunch.
we've just had our kickoff meeting regarding our lacuna exhibition. We would love to do this, I just wanted to get back to you and inquire about the possible dates for that event. Another question that arose is, if we could do a two or possibly three days, where each day would include a different theme, a different aspect of our collective being exposed.
I'm writing to happily invite you all to a lasercutting workshop. The machine is now operating again and I don't want to hide it from you, that's why I would like to invite everybody who's interested to check it out. And possibly to put some drawings and whatnot onto acrylic glass, wood, leather and anything else except mdf. Figuring out how to get it more under control would be something nice too. Generative approaches are possible.
All kinds hacks with the thing should be possible, so whoever wants to take things to the edge is warmly welcomed. I'm thinking like even directly controlling the thing in real-time with a graphics tablet or so. Shouldn't be impossible, I suppose.

I'll get tons of small acrylic glass pieces to use. They're almost free- see the image attached.
Well, when the workshop happens, I would take part I think. Though I'd be a little more interested in a general introduction to FreeCAD, though that might be when he's explaining his polygon kit.

Go ahead with the meetup thing, maybe somebody else is interested, too.

Show'n'tell on monday- yeah. I'll be there giving ma feedbackz.
I'm writing to give some feedback about the yesterdays SC meetings.

I'm happy Peter will join, I think Lacuna is the right spot for him and vice versa.

Drinks. Yeah, I'd say 1€ for everybody is fair. When buying e.g. a mate bottle for 50cents it should be fine for everybody to get it at the price of 1€. Making different prices for different people feels weird. Maybe we can adjust prices when we do a party or so?

The website seems to be taking shape, Soma did some massive start, that I've checked out yesterday. It's available here: https://github.com/LacunaLab/lacunalab-website
I've added some notes on how to set up the project under Ubuntu. More actual website implementation upcoming. Maybe we should have another evening of working on this soon--?

What do you need a robben&wientjes and a driver for?

Wifi- I have another wifi router, I'm not sure if it's compatible, though?

The proposed decision making is great!

Let's have a christmas party, yeah. Setting up a doodle is the way to go? 
I've already been speaking to a few of you, this idea to create some anonymous-collaborative project, that we could use for our exhibition. It's an idea where it is really important that _everybody_ gets involved.

What it essentially boils down to is the need for 10 pages of text from everybody. This text will then be fed into a recurrent neural network layed out for text. After this is done it'll be possible to extract text/poems from this that reflects all of our output. This already exciting enough to do it, isn't it? What follows after that will be up to us.
Important is that this text comes from YOU. It doesn't matter weather it's outgoing emails, diary entries, notebook notes about projects etc- all these should be sufficient to get some (semi/abstract) meaningfull output. 
 
As it might be slightly sensitive text, I came up with a way we can organize this. Say everbody who wants to join in on this, has their text ready, not everybody might be comfortable with sending this text via email to anybody (especially not to me most probably). Regarding this, I suggest to use this encryption technique.
Of course the output of these networks are up for heavy critics weather it makes sense and if yet in what degree. Eventually it might look like regular bullshit at first sight but I'm the opinion there is definately something hidden to learn something about ourselves from.
I've done some quick experiements and trained one of these networks on all of the texts of articles that I saved to read later, but eventually never did. It's trained on about 500 articles and links containing various types of texts.
So much so far, I'm already throwing this out there, as it'll probably take a while until we get this going. I'm hoping this is all clear enough and hopefully all of you are interested in this! I'll suggest this in person one of these days, maybe on monday, so everybody can ask questions and we can talk about it. 
Coolio- it might be good if all text would be one language, so I'd say we have to all agree on one. I suppose it's gonne be english

Why don't you extract some texts and we start from there, maybe we can formulate some guidelines from that. The first thing that comes to mind, is that there should be as little 'markdown' as possible and rather text, I suppose. 
thanks for all the texts, I'm looking forward to checking it out. I've got texts from 8 people(Sarah, Aurelia, Alex, Jerry, Enno, Abe, Mei, Marcel), which is great, but we need to try to include everybody.

That's why I'm extending the deadline for non-english texts until the 17.01. midnight. Yes, I would be happy to receive texts in german/spanish or any other language!
Abe has a point with what he's saying. Derk is probably not at all interested in the general culture of Lacuna, he simply wants to work on this project with Jerry. And it seems like he'll not be come a member of Lacuna either, as he's around only project-related. At the same time, it should be possible to invite external people to work on something.
I'm not sure what to think of this, but generally it does not feel nice to say 'no' to this. Plus, Aurelia is really just subletting her space, if I understand correctly. This is, if I remember correctly, part of our rules and 'allowed'- thus skipping people in the waiting list.

I would still like him to integrate with the rest of us and give feedback about these questions. 
i would like to invite again everybody who attended last time, as well as those who didn't/couldn't. it's always good to get some feedback as i would suggest to have some bit more concrete ideas around, to get going, it's not that far away anymore. as well as individual ideas i would like to talk again about the general big picture, i have the feeling there are still some things to discuss and recap on. here's somas valuable notes from last time.
i havent checked our project stack for the exhibition in a while but i can see some things have been added in the meantime. would be great to have little presentations covering some things like what's necessary to create it and so on, so it's easier for people to cross-join projects.
here's the link.
Working place number seven is free for quite a while already and I have to admit, I'm not sure if I like that passive aggressiveness there.

It sure is getting full everywhere and you have a point with that flexibility for actually having proper space for residents. Though I would still vote for Peter to stay- I advised him to talk to Caroline/arturo regarding figuring out an alternative arrangement for the elevator room, so he can fit in there, too.
word up, arturo. i really don't wanna get rid of him, too.

i suppose letting him stay at soma's desk would be fine for now until we found another spot for him. a permanent one. though that would have to wait until we rearranged some things in the main room, Thomas told me you were talking about moving the big shelf somewhere else, so that corner would be free.

i've been thinking whether he could fit a desk into the elevator room somehow, but that's up for you three (wishi,arturo,carolina) in there to decide if there's space. 
This is a valid point but I think Peter would be, in general, a great addition to lacuna. Even though he's a developer by trade, I think he made it pretty clear what he's interested in. And by the way the website development went, we might even be in need for another developer :) He's also usually very interested in doing documentation, support in things and so on.
I haven't voted on the vote, as I thought it would be 'no'-only vote. So summing it up, maybe we discuss this again next monday, there seems to be some potential for that.

Fyi, I've invited him for the exhibition meeting tonigh!
if I'm not completely mistaken, the Cyborgs are in charge of cleaning this week. I am not rly aware of that happened, but they have just 'found out' two days ago after our little chat about the cleaning issue. Sooo, the whole plan is mixed up at the moment, as it was actually Carolina's turn last week and she refused to do it and scheduled the Cyborgs in.
If that all happened already, I don't know. Correct me if anything of the above is wrong.
thanks for the info Thomas, actually Alfredo contacted me this evening to meet us at Lacuna to discuss our exhibition. I think what he expects is a rough program from us- what will be there. I think I could postpone the meeting with him for next week, though I will be not around then, as I'll be travelling.

What are your thoughts about this? Can we put together a program tomorrow?
I've been contacted by Lieke- she would like to have an abstract of our exhibition by early next week. If we are able to throw something together by then, we would get a feature in the ExBerliner magazine ( http://www.exberliner.com ). Moreover she was asking for a picture to use for the feature and the Spektrum website- do you guys think we can put something together by then? I don't think it's gotta be more than 100 words.
Generally I would suggest that we do it, something we all are happy with. Anybody volunteering for taking over the responsibility for that? 
Yeah, we should have a brief chat what we want to use as a picture for them. Maybe anybody who has got an opinion about this can write what their thoughts are, so we can proceed ASAP. Let's make this loop short, please everybody, throw your opinion in a mail and let us know until tomorrow evening what you think. Even info from people that they don't care would be helpful! Thanks Peter for caring already.

Nobody is responsible for that, yet. I am doing the communication with Spektrum at least, so that might be me, even? 
For three days, Spektrum is overgrown by Lacuna Lab, a Berlin-centred collective of trans-disciplinary artists. For the collective's inaugural exhibition, spores of ideas waft across the canal from their studio on Paul-Lincke-Ufer, taking root as a multi-channel network of biology- and technology-based pieces. These objects and installations draw input from their surroundings in Spektrum, the audience, and one another, creating a playful environment of screens, textiles, lights, lasers, plants, water vapor, and interwoven generative sounds. Featuring an interactive dance / audio performance and a campfire coding session, this exhibition investigates collaboration, perception, growth and decay. 
Lieke was asking for more pictures in order to announce the exhibition on their website. I agreed but asked for time until Wednesday (23.03.) at least. In regards of this, it would be great for everybody to think about possible motifes of the works you are the owner of. And possible take pictures already. 

Thomas and me usually got the drinks and we discussed that having prices higher than in the späti is a bit weird. At the same time we're taking care to not get too expensive stuff, that's where the 1€ rumor is from. And theoretically we're still gaining money with 1€ per bottle.
For workshops or other events we could keep the 1,50€.
yea, these questions are helpful- lets make a quick status-update round?
plus it would be good to clarify our connections. so we could make some kind of diagram of the works and how they interact. though it could be im the only one who isnt up to date on that, as ive been gone for a while. 
of course, thanks Thomas for lining this up for us.

As I am the one in contact with Spektrum, I need to set a deadline for you, to fill out the Excel sheet that Thomas provided. That deadline is Saturday (tomorrow) evening/night, so I have things to work with when communicating with Spektrum on Sunday. 

Tomorrow I'm taking some photos for them- does anybody have a camera of better quality than iPhone6?
Aurelia, that thing already has been manifested as an issue on github. At somebody somebody will work on a couple of them.

Do you remember when we were talking about giving each of us a subtitle? I recon that would give a bit of clarity about what kind of people are at Lacuna. At the same time this is kind of self-explanatory in contrast to writing more general explanatory text. I would be a fan of that subtitle collection- who else?

	